##  Types of charitable purpose

The Charities Act 2009 lists four types of charitable purpose.

**1\. The prevention or relief of poverty or economic hardship**

Poverty and economic hardship does not only mean a lack of money or material
things. It can also refer to the impact a lack of money or material things has
on a person. For example, your organisation could provide advice about how to
manage debt, or training to improve people’s employment prospects.

What the prevention or relief of poverty or economic hardship means varies
depending on who your organisation works with, and where it works. For
example, an organisation working in one of the world’s poorest regions might
provide basic sanitation and running water while an organisation working in
Ireland might help relieve homelessness.

**2\. The advancement of education**

The advancement of education means that your organisation must support
education. All schools are required to register as charities. But many
organisations that are not schools may also qualify as charities under this
definition. For example, your organisation can build schools in a developing
country or provide school books to children of low-income families in Ireland.

**3\. The advancement of religion**

Existing case law establishes that a religion has two core elements:

  * Belief in a ‘Supreme Being’ 
  * Faith and worship of that ‘Supreme Being’ 

The Charities Regulator will examine whether your organisation meets the
criteria of a religion (as outlined above) and how your organisation advances
this religion. For example you might provide places of worship, raise
awareness of religious beliefs or organise pilgrimages or retreats.

Donations or gifts for the advancement of religion are presumed to be of
public benefit, unless it is proven otherwise. However, a donation or gift is
not covered by advancement of religion if it benefits an organisation or cult:

  * That uses oppressive psychological manipulation 
  * Whose main objective is to make a profit 

If the Charities Regulator wants to rule that a gift for the advancement of
religion is not of public benefit, it must get the consent of the Attorney
General

**4\. Any other purpose that is of benefit to the community**

This is a broad category, but the Charities Act 2009 provides examples of
purposes that are of benefit to the community, which include:

  * Advancement of community welfare, including assistance for people in need who are young, old, sick or have a disability 
  * Promotion of civic responsibility or voluntary work 
  * Promotion of health 
  * Promotion of religious or racial harmony 
  * Protection of the natural environment and the prevention of animal suffering 
  * Advancement of the efficient use of the property of charitable organisations 
  * Advancement of the arts, culture, heritage or sciences 
  * The integration of disadvantaged people into society 

An organisation that only benefits one person is not legally a charity, it is
regarded as being a private benefit rather than a public benefit. An example
of this would be fundraising for one person’s medical costs.

It is acceptable for an organisation to benefit only a small group of people,
as long as there are no restrictions, or only reasonable restrictions, on who
can benefit. For example, fundraising to pay medical costs for people who all
have the same illness, even if it is a rare illness and there are a small
number of people eligible.
