##  Excluded bodies

Certain types of organisations cannot become charities. They are known as
excluded bodies and include:

  * Sporting bodies (see below) 
  * Bodies that promote a political cause, unless it relates directly to the advancement of the charitable purposes of the body (see below) 
  * Political parties, or bodies that promote a political party or candidate (there are separate registration requirements for political parties) 
  * Trade unions or representative bodies of employers 
  * Chambers of commerce 
  * Bodies that promote purposes that are unlawful, immoral, contrary to public policy, in support of terrorism or terrorist activities, or for the benefit of an organisation that it is unlawful to be a member of 

**Sporting bodies**

Not all sports-related bodies are automatically excluded from becoming a
charity. For example, a cycling club for survivors of cancer and their
families in a particular part of Ireland may be considered a charity under the
advancement of community welfare and the promotion of health. A sports club
set up for the integration of people with special needs may be eligible for
charitable status.

**Promotion of political causes**

An organisation which has an exclusively political purpose cannot be
registered as a charity. An organisation is considered to have a political
purpose if it:

  * Is a political party 
  * Promotes a political party or candidate 
  * Is set up exclusively to promote a political cause, such as bringing about a change in the law or policies of the Government or other public bodies 

However, a charity can engage in activities that promote a political cause if
the promotion of the political cause:

  * Relates directly to the advancement of its charitable purpose 
  * Does not promote a political party or candidate 
  * Is not contrary to the charityâ€™s governing document 

The Charities Regulator has published [ Guidance on Charities and the
Promotion of Political Causes (pdf)
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/media/2272/guidance-on-charities-and-the-
promotion-of-political-causes.pdf) , which explains the rules that apply to
organisations when they work to promote a political cause.

If your charity is promoting a political cause, you should also comply with
the [ Regulation of Lobbying Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/5/enacted/en/html) . Under this
Act anyone engaged in lobbying must register on the public Register of
Lobbying and supply information about their lobbying activities to the [
Standards in Public Office Commission ](https://www.sipo.ie/en/) . Lobbying.ie
have published a list of the [ top ten things charities need to know about
lobbying ](https://www.lobbying.ie/help-resources/information-for-
lobbyists/top-ten-things-charities-need-to-know-about-lobbying/) . You can [
register on lobbying.ie
](https://www.lobbying.ie/umbraco/Surface/AccountSurface/Register) .

[ Read more about the regulation of lobbying ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-
government-works/standards-and-accountability/regulation-of-lobbying/) .
