**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > Leave and holidays

#  Leave and holidays

  * Overview 

[ Leave for parents ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-
and-holidays/leave-for-parents/)

Overview of the different types of statutory leave entitlements available for
working parents.

  * [ Maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/)

All female employees are entitled to maternity leave from work immediately
before and after the birth of their child.

  * [ Adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/)

Adoptive leave gives one parent who adopts a child, 24 weeks’ leave from work
after the child is placed in your care.

  * [ Paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/)

Paternity leave gives new parents 2 weeks off work in the first 6 months after
the birth or placement in the case of an adoption.

  * [ Parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/)

The Parental Leave Acts 1998-2019 allow parents to take 26 weeks parental
leave from employment, up until their child’s 12th birthday.

  * [ Parent's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/)

Each parent is entitled to 9 weeks paid parent’s leave during the first 2
years of a child’s life, or in the case of adoption, within 2 years of the
placement of the child with the family.

  * [ Annual leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-leave/)

Employment law gives employees various entitlements to leave from work ranging
from holidays to parental leave. Find out how your leave is calculated.

  * [ Public holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-holidays/)

This gives a list of the ten public holidays and describes your entitlement to
paid time off for these.

  * [ Sick leave and sick pay ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/)

This page describes the new entitlement to paid sick leave of 5 days a year,
paid at 70% of normal pay up to a maximum of €110 a day.

  * [ Carer's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/)

The Carers Leave Act 2001 allows employees to take unpaid time off work to
provide full-time care for people that require this care.

  * [ Other types of leave from work ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-work/)

The law gives an employee a limited right to leave from work in times of
family crisis (force majeure). Find out about compassionate leave, jury
service and career breaks.

  * [ Case study: Public holiday entitlement ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-public-holiday-entitlement/)

Part-time workers are entitled to public holidays even if they are not due to
work on the day of the public holiday. This case study shows how a part-time
worker's payment for a public holiday is calculated.

  * [ Case study: force majeure leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-leave/)

Example of 2 different requests for force majeure leave, one of which was
granted. The second request was refused as there was no entitlement under the
Parental Leave Act 1998.

  * [ Checklist when applying for carer's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-leave/)

Describes the different procedures involved when you are applying for carer's
leave.

  * [ Unpaid leave for medical care ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/)

Unpaid leave for medical care gives you 5 days unpaid leave from work to deal
with serious medical care for a child or other relevant person.

  * [ Domestic violence leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/domestic-violence-leave/)

Since November 2023, workers have a legal right to 5 days’ paid domestic
violence leave if they need to take time off work because of domestic violence
and abuse.
