##  What happens when I report a crime?

An investigation begins when a complaint is made to the Garda Síochána by a
victim or other person.

If you are the victim of a crime, you will be asked to make a statement
explaining, in detail, the incident that took place.

A Garda will write down your account and read it back to you. When you are
happy that the statement accurately describes your complaint, you will be
asked to sign it. The matter can then be investigated by the Gardaí.

You may bring somebody with you for support, including [ a legal
representative (solicitor)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) when
making a statement or for any interviews that follow this. The Gardaí may ask
you to choose a different person or legal representative if they think it is
in your best interest, or if they think the person you have chosen could
interfere with the investigation. Read more about [ making a statement
](/en/justice/witnesses/admissibility-of-witness-statements-in-a-criminal-
trial/) .

After reporting a crime, you should receive a letter from the [ Garda Victim
Service Office ](https://www.garda.ie/en/victim-services/garda-victim-
service/) that provides you with the investigating Garda’s name and your case
number. You also have a right to ask for a copy of your statement. In some
cases, such as those involving sexual assault or domestic violence, a letter
may not be sent but contact may be made in person.

You can get detailed information about [ support services available to victims
of crime ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-of-
crime/support-services-for-victims-of-crime/) , including information about [
compensation for victims of crime schemes
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-of-crime/compensation-
for-victims-of-crime/) .

The [ Crime Victims Helpline ](https://crimevictimshelpline.ie/) , a listening
and support service for victims of crime, have [ produced a useful video
](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N2C8Er17PY8&feature=youtu.be) outlining this
process.
