##  How to register a birth

There is no fee for registration of a birth.

You can register your child’s birth at any [ Civil Registration Service
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/find-a-civil-
registration-service/) , regardless of where the birth took place. For
convenience, most people will choose their local office. If you register the
birth at a Civil Registration Office, you must sign the Register of Births to
complete to process of registration.

  * **By post or email  
** To register a birth, complete a [ Birth Registration Application form (pdf)
](https://assets.hse.ie/media/documents/birth-registration-application-form-
march-2023_1.pdf) and post or email the completed form to your chosen [ Civil
Registration Office ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-
marriages/find-a-civil-registration-service/) . All births can be registered
using this form but you also must attend the office to sign the Register of
Births to complete to process of registration. Your child's birth will not be
registered until you sign the register. The Registrar will let you know when
you can attend to sign the register.  
  

  * **In-person  
** Alternatively, you can complete the [ Birth Registration Application form
(pdf) ](https://assets.hse.ie/media/documents/birth-registration-application-
form-march-2023_1.pdf) and bring it with you to your appointment at the [
Civil Registration Office ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-
marriages/find-a-civil-registration-service/) . Depending on the Civil
Registration Service you chose, [ you may be able to book an appointment
online ](https://crsbirths.hse.ie/hse-self-referral/?flow=birth) or by phone.
Walk-ins are available in some offices at certain times. Use the HSE’s [ Find
a Civil Registration Service ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-
marriages/find-a-civil-registration-service/) to find out how to contact your
local office.  
  

  * **Online  
** From 12 August 2024, [ some parents will be invited to register the birth
of their baby online ](https://civilregistration.mywelfare.ie/WhoCanRegister)
on [ MyWelfare.ie ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/) using their [ verified
MyGovID account ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/egovernment/mygovid/) .  
  
You need:

    * A [ verified MyGovID account ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/egovernment/mygovid/) . Both parents need a verified MyGovID account if you are not married to each other. Find out more about [ getting a verified MyGovID account ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/egovernment/mygovid/) . 
    * The birth notification ID. The online birth registration service can only be accessed using a unique birth notification ID issued to the mother by the Civil Registration Office by post. 

There are some registration scenarios that cannot be completed online at this
time. Contact your local [ Civil Registration Office
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/find-a-civil-
registration-service/) to find out how to register the birth of a child if
either parent is:

  * Separated (still legally married) 
  * Divorced 
  * Widowed 
  * Deceased 
  * Registering a birth where both parents wish to be registered as a same sex couple 
  * Registering a donor-conceived birth 
  * Registering a still birth 

After you register the birth, you can get your baby’s birth certificate. There
is a [ €20 fee for a full standard birth certificate ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby#l62fd2) .
