###  Are all indictable offences tried in the higher courts?

Indictable offences are serious charges which can or must be tried before a
judge and jury in the Circuit Court or the Central Criminal Court. However,
not all indictable offences are tried before a jury. Indictable offences can
be divided into the following 3 categories:

  * Offences which must always be tried on indictment in front of a judge and jury 
  * Offences which can be tried summarily or by indictment at the request of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the judge or the accused 
  * Offences which can be tried either summarily or on indictment at the request of the Director of Public Prosecutions, as long as the District Court judge agrees 

**Offences which must always be tried on indictment in front of a judge and
jury**

There are a number of offences which must be tried before a judge and jury and
these offences are listed in the [ Criminal Procedure Act 1967
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1967/en/act/pub/0012/index.html) and the [
Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act 1990
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1990/en/act/pub/0032/index.html) . These
include:

  * Offences under the [ Treason Act 1939 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1939/en/act/pub/0010/index.html)
  * Murder, attempted murder, conspiracy to murder 
  * Piracy 
  * Rape 
  * Aggravated sexual assault 

There are also a number of other offences which cannot be dealt with in the
District Court (summary disposal) and must be dealt with on indictment, for
example:

  * Assault causing serious harm. The penalty on conviction for this offence is a fine or imprisonment for life or both. The [ statute (or piece of law) ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0026/sec0004.html#zza26y1997s4) for this offence does not allow for this offence to be dealt with summarily. 
  * Riot. The [ piece of law ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0014.html#zza2y1994s14) covering this offence states that it can only be dealt with on indictment. 

**Offences which can be tried summarily or by indictment at the request of the
Director of Public Prosecutions, the judge or the accused**

[ Certain offences
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1951/act/2/schedule/1/enacted/en/html#sched1)
can be dealt with in the District Court if the following 3 conditions are met:

  1. The court is of the opinion that the facts proved or alleged constitute a minor offence fit to be tried summarily (in the District Court) 
  2. The accused person does not object to being tried in the District Court, even when told of their right to be tried by a judge and a jury 
  3. The [ Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) ](http://www.dppireland.ie/) consents to the accused being tried summarily for the offence 

In practice, the judge looks to see what the DPP has directed and then asks
the prosecuting Garda for an outline of the facts of the case. The judge then
decides whether or not they are willing to hear the case or send it forward to
a higher court to be dealt with. If the judge decides to hear the case in the
District Court, the accused is allowed choose if they want to be dealt with in
the District Court or the Circuit Court. Normally, if an accused is given this
choice they ask to be dealt with in the District Court, as the maximum penalty
in the District Court is less than that available in the Circuit Court.

Examples of some of the offences that can be dealt in this way are:

  * Offences under Section 7(2) and Section 8 of the [ Criminal Law Act 1997 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0014/index.html)
  * Offences under the [ Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act 2001 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2001/act/50/enacted/en/html)

**Offences which can be tried either summarily or on indictment at the request
of the Director of Public Prosecutions, subject to the agreement of the
District Court judge**

Certain offences can be dealt with in the District Court if the following 2
conditions are met:

  1. The court is of the opinion that the facts proved or alleged constitute a minor offence fit to be tried summarily (in the District Court) 
  2. The [ Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) ](https://www.dppireland.ie/) consents to the accused being tried summarily for the offence 

The offences in this category are created by statute (piece of law), and the
statute outlines the different punishments for the offences on summary
conviction and on indictment. Examples of these offences include:

  * Assault causing harm under Section 3 of the [ Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/act/26/enacted/en/html)
  * Reckless discharge of a firearm under Section 8 of the F [ irearms and Offensive Weapons Act 1990 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1990/act/12/enacted/en/html)

In practice, the DPP issues instructions stating whether the offence should be
dealt with in the District or Circuit Court. If the DPP directs summary
disposal (District Court), the District Court judge hears a summary of the
facts from the prosecuting Garda and then decides if they will allow the case
to be dealt with in their court. If the judge is not satisfied that the
offence is a minor offence they can refuse to deal with the case and send it
forward to the Circuit Court to be dealt with on indictment.
