##  The British-Irish Agreement

The British-Irish Agreement is an agreement between the British and Irish
governments. The Agreement committed to the various institutions set out in
the Multi-Party Agreement. It also sets out the agreed position of both
governments on Northern Irelandâ€™s current and future status.

Under the terms of the British-Irish Agreement, both governments:

  * Recognised the legitimacy of any choice made by the people of Northern Ireland whether to continue as part of the United Kingdom (UK) or to become part of a united Ireland (the principle of self-determination) 
  * Recognised that it is only for the people of the whole of the island of Ireland to agree to a united Ireland, if that is a wish of a majority of the persons on both sides of the Irish border 
  * Recognised that, while a substantial section of Northern Ireland wished for a united Ireland, the majority of the people of Northern Ireland wished to remain a part of the United Kingdom 
  * Committed to bringing into effect the necessary legislation if the conditions for a united Ireland were met 
  * Committed that, regardless of any choice made by the people of Northern Ireland, the relevant government will treat all the people of Northern Ireland equally and impartially and fully respect the civil and political rights, and social and cultural traditions of both communities. 
  * Recognised that it was the right of all persons born in Northern Ireland to [ identify as Irish ](/en/moving-country/irish-citizenship/your-right-to-irish-citizenship/) or British, or both, and to hold both Irish and British citizenship if they so choose. This right is to continue regardless of any change in the status of Northern Ireland. 

The Agreement required changes to the [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) and to British
legislation.

Before the Agreement, the Irish Constitution maintained a territorial claim to
Northern Ireland. The new provisions approved by [ referendum
](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-
referendums/constitutional-referendum-in-ireland/) state that, while it is the
firm will of the Irish nation to unite the island, such changes can only be
brought about by consent of a majority of the people, democratically
expressed, in both jurisdictions in the island. Changes were also made to
reflect the citizenship rights of everyone born in Northern Ireland as stated
in the Agreement.

The British Government, through the [ Northern Ireland Act 1998
](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/47/contents) , enshrined the
principle of self-determination in legislation and also repealed the [
Government of Ireland Act 1920
](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo5/10-11/67/contents/enacted) , which
initially partitioned the island of Ireland. A referendum on a united Ireland
is to be called by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland when it appears
likely that a majority of the people would vote in favour of a united Ireland.
If the referendum is defeated, at least 7 years must pass before a new
referendum can be held.

The Northern Ireland Act 1998 also provides the legislative basis for the
various institutions set out in the Multi-Party Agreement.
