##  Who is on the school board?

The composition of the board of management for schools with more than one
teacher is

  * Two direct nominees of the patron 
  * Two parents of children enrolled in the school (one mother and one father) elected by the parents 
  * The principal 
  * One other serving teacher elected by the teaching staff 
  * Two extra members agreed by the representatives of the patron, teachers and parents 

There are particular rules for boards of management for convent and monastery
schools in relation to the teacher representatives. If the principal is a
religious, the elected teacher-member must be a lay person and, if the
principal is a lay person, it is recommended that the elected teacher-member
be a religious. In one-teacher schools, there is one direct nominee of the
patron, one teacher representative, one parent and one extra member proposed
by these nominees.

There are certain criteria set out for choosing the 2 community
representatives on the board of management.

  * The people appointed must have a commitment to the ethos of the school. In the case of Catholic schools, they must have an understanding of and commitment to Catholic education as outlined in the Deed of Trust for Catholic Schools. For Church of Ireland schools, they must be members of that Church; in Presbyterian schools, they must also be church members and in Muslim schools they should be members of the Muslim community in Ireland (in all cases the patron of the school can decide otherwise). For Educate Together schools they must have a commitment to the ethos of the school. 
  * They must have skills that are complementary to the board's requirements 
  * They must be interested in education but normally should not be parents of students currently attending the school or teachers currently on the staff 
  * In Gaeltacht schools and Gaelscoileanna, they are expected to have a good knowledge of the Irish language. 
  * The need to maintain a gender balance must be a consideration 

The patron appoints the chairman of the board.

The [ rules set out in detail ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/34186/31f98d651a6147ef91d781fa3805ccc7.pdf)
how the parents' representatives are to be chosen, including the notice to be
given to all parents and how replacements are chosen.

In general, members of the board may not hold any interest in the school
property or get paid for serving on the board. The Education Act 1998
explicitly clarifies that being on the board does not confer any property
interest on a board member. Employees, other than the teacher representatives,
may not be on the board.

**Pilot shared governance arrangements**

Under the shared governance arrangements two schools under the same patronage
can operate a shared governance arrangement if this has been agreed with the
patron. This is a pilot scheme introduced in 2015 and extended until 2023.

There are separate rules for a pilot shared governance arrangement. The board
must comply with the [ Governance Manual 2019-2023
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/34186/31f98d651a6147ef91d781fa3805ccc7.pdf)
. Each school will have a separate 12- member Board, but there will be just
one election/nomination process across both schools and the 12 people who are
elected/nominated will serve on the Boards of both schools.

Each Board operates as a separate legal entity with the same group of people
managing issues in a consistent manner in each of the two schools. Further
information is in the governance manual on the terms of this arrangement.

The board of a shared governance arrangement are made up of:

  * 3 direct nominees of the patron 
  * 3 parents of children enrolled and in attendance in either of the two schools. At least must be a mother and at least one must be a father and each school must have at least one parent of a child enrolled and attending its school on the Board). The parents must be elected by the general body of parents of children who are enrolled and have started attendance at either of the two schools. 
  * The principals of the 2 schools. 
  * One serving teacher on the staff of one of the schools, elected by vote of the joint teaching staff. 
  * 3 extra members proposed by those above nominees. 

Each board is a separate legal entity. Each school must hold its own separate
board meetings and keep a separate bank account.

**People who are not eligible for board membership**

The following people are not eligible for membership of a board:

  * A person who is an undischarged bankrupt or was involved in a court procedure for settling with creditors in the previous 3 years 
  * A person who received a prison sentence in the previous 5 years. 
  * A person, other than the principal or the elected teacher nominee, who is employed by the board of management or ETB 

A board member can be removed from the Board or the board can be dissolved by
the patron with the consent of the Minister.
