##  When do I need planning permission?

You will need planning permission if you are going to build a house. You may
need planning permission if you want to [ build an extension or make other
changes to your existing house ](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-
permission-for-altering-a-house/) . Some small extensions and conservatories
do not need planning permission. You should always check this with your local
authority before you start any building.

You will also need planning permission if you want to significantly change how
you use your land or buildings. For example, you will need planning permission
to open a cr√®che on your property and you may need it if you are [ renting
your property for short-term lets ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/renting-your-property-for-shortterm-lets/) . There are some exceptions
to this, for example, you do not need planning permission to change certain
vacant commercial properties (including pubs) into homes. These exceptions are
set out in the [ Planning and Development Regulations 2001 to 2021
](https://assets.gov.ie/135619/1ef55833-465c-48da-afc0-592a164fdd1d.pdf) .

You may also need planning permission for a modular home or building. This
depends on a number of factors such as how big it is, where it will be
situated and what it will be used for. A modular home is a home that is built
off-site and then delivered and finished at the planned location. These homes
are often known as rapid build homes as they are quicker to build. The
Government is building rapid build homes in certain locations for families
fleeing the war in Ukraine. Planning permission is not needed for this [ rapid
build housing programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ef882-rapid-build-
housing/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/publication/65a50-modular-
housing/#environmental-considerations) , but the Government must take
environmental issues into account when choosing locations.

Your local authority can advise if you will need planning permission and give
you general advice about your application. Your local authority will also be
able to tell you whether your proposals are likely to comply with [ the
development plan ](/en/housing/planning-permission/development-plans/) for
your area.
