##  Brexit preparations

Measures to prepare for Brexit, including the possibility of a “no-deal”
Brexit, are being put in place across government departments. Funding of over
€110 million has been allocated to Brexit measures. These include:

**Agriculture, Food and the Marine:** a package to address challenges arising
from Brexit in the farm and food sectors, including funding for Bord Bia to
support Brexit-related promotion and development work, investment in food
innovation facilities, and investment in food companies to improve
productivity and competitiveness.

**Business, Enterprise and Innovation:** loans under a new Future Growth
Scheme to allow businesses (including farmers) to make strategic investments
after Brexit; expanding the global footprint of enterprise agencies to take
advantage of opportunities that may arise from Brexit; IDA property investment
in further regional locations; strengthening and resourcing of the Office of
the Director of Corporate Enforcement; and resourcing the Local Enterprise
Offices to help fund local and indigenous enterprises to meet the challenge of
Brexit.

**Foreign Affairs and Trade:** extra resources to the Passport Service to meet
rising demand, including Brexit-specific increases; developing a whole-of-
Government Brexit Preparedness Communications Plan; increasing support to
organisations that promote reconciliation and understanding between
communities in Northern Ireland, and between North and South; and ongoing
implementation of the Global Ireland Initiative.

**Transport, Tourism and Sport:** programme to support the tourism industry,
help prepare it to address the impact of Brexit and grow alternative markets
in the context of Brexit and a decline in UK visitors.

**Education and Skills:** upskilling and reskilling for sectors and regions
most vulnerable to Brexit.
