####  Community Employment

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant **started a CE scheme in 2023** ,
your joint means are halved. The maximum payment for your situation will
**not** include an increase for an adult dependant. It will include full rate
increases for your child dependants.

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant started their CE scheme **before 1
January 2023** , your maximum payment will include an increase for an adult
dependant and any child dependents. Joint means are not halved and CE income
is [ assessed as part-time work ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/)
.

**Limitation**

If you are claiming Jobseeker's Allowance and your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant is getting one of the social welfare payments listed below, the
total amount paid to you as a couple cannot be more than the maximum amount
that would be paid to one person (including adult and child dependants) on one
social welfare payment.

  * Illness Benefit 
  * Disablement Pension (when paid with Illness Benefit or Incapacity Supplement) 
  * Injury Benefit 
  * Invalidity Pension 
  * State Pension (Non-Contributory) 
  * State Pension (Contributory) 
  * State Pension (Transition) 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Farm Assist (FA) 

If you are both claiming Jobseeker’s Allowance, the rate paid to each person
is half of the family rate. If either of you is under 25, each person is paid
half of the family rate that would apply to them individually.

**Example of limitation (2024)**  
---  
Paul is 36 and qualifies for Jobseeker’s Allowance. His partner Anna is
getting Invalidity Pension.  Anna and Paul have chosen Anna's Invalidity
Pension as the primary payment rather than Paul's Jobseeker's Allowance
because Invalidity Pension is paid at a higher weekly rate.  Anna on
Invalidity Pension (IP) €237.50  
Qualified adult rate for IP €169.70  Maximum payable to Anna and Paul €407.20
In this case Paul's JA payment is reduced to €169.70 and Anna is paid the full
amount of IP.  **Paul will get Jobseeker’s Allowance of €169.70**  
  