##  What motoring offences result in penalty points?

[ The Road Traffic Act 2002, (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2002/en/act/pub/0012/index.html) legislates
for motoring offences that incur penalty points. The Road Safety Authority
maintains an [ up-to-date list of penalty point motoring offences.
](https://www.rsa.ie/en/RSA/Licensed-Drivers/Penalty-points/Types-of-
offences/)

Examples of how penalty points and fines are awarded.

**Speeding offences** : A fixed charge fine of €160, together with 3 penalty
points. If you have been caught speeding on a police traffic camera, you will
get a notice of your fine and penalty points for the offence by post. You have
28 days in which to pay your fine from the date the notice is issued to you.
If you do not pay your fine, the fine then increases to €240, which you must
pay within 28 days. If after this time (56 days) you still have not paid your
fine, the offence is referred to the courts. If you are convicted in court of
speeding offences and non-payment of fines, you will automatically receive 5
penalty points and a fine up to a maximum of €1,000.

**Seatbelt offences** : If you drive without a seatbelt or allow children
under 17 years to travel in your car without a seatbelt, you will incur a
fixed charge fine of €120. You must pay this fine within 28 days or face an
increased fine of €180 payable within 56 days of the offence. 3 penalty points
will be added to your licence if you pay the fine on time. If you are
convicted in court for non-wearing of a seatbelt, 5 penalty points will be
added to your licence and you will be liable to a €2,000 fine for a first
offence. [ Read more about seatbelts and the law in Ireland ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/roads-and-safety/seatbelts-when-motoring-in-ireland/) .

**Motor insurance offences** : If you drive without insurance, you will get 5
penalty points and will have to appear in court. The court can issue a fine of
up to €5,000 and can send you to prison for up to 6 months. The court can
disqualify you from driving instead of issuing penalty points.

**Careless driving** : If you drive ‘a vehicle in a public place without due
care and attention' you can get up to 5 penalty points on your licence and a
fine of up to €5,000. If careless driving causes death or serious bodily harm,
you are liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term of up to
2 years or to a fine of up to €10,000 or to both.
