**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) >
Cost of living issues

#  Cost of living issues

  * [ Help with the cost of living ](/en/money-and-tax/cost-of-living/help-with-cost-of-living/)

This page has advice on some of the supports that are available and
information about how you can manage your money.

  * [ Additional Needs Payment ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/additional-needs-payment/)

Additional Needs Payments are paid to people who have essential and
exceptional needs that they cannot meet out of their weekly income. It can be
paid for funeral costs and fuel bills. You must have a low income.

**This document is in:** [ Supplementary Welfare Schemes ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/)

  * [ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/)

The Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance (BSCFA) is paid each year
to families on certain social welfare payments and other benefits. It helps
with the cost of going to school.

**This document is in:** [ Families and children ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/)

  * [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)

Working Family Payment is a weekly tax-free payment to people on low pay. You
must have at least one child to qualify.

**This document is in:** [ Families and children ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/)

  * [ Paying your electricity bills ](/en/consumer/utilities/paying-electricity-bill/)

Help with understanding your electricity bill and advice if you are worried
about paying your bill.

**This document is in:** [ Utilities ](/en/consumer/utilities/)

  * [ Paying your gas bills ](/en/consumer/utilities/paying-gas-bill/)

Help with understanding your gas bill and advice if you are worried about
paying your bill.

**This document is in:** [ Utilities ](/en/consumer/utilities/)

  * [ Medical cards ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/)

The medical card scheme entitles certain people to free public health
services. This document explains the medical card and how to apply for it.

**This document is in:** [ Medical cards and GP visit cards
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/)

  * [ Grants for a home energy upgrade ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)

This scheme provides grants to help to upgrade the energy efficiency of your
home to a BER rating of B2 or above.

**This document is in:** [ Grants for home renovations and improvements
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-
improvements/)

  * [ Free energy upgrades (Warmer Homes Scheme) ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/)

This scheme provides free home energy upgrades to homeowners who get certain
social welfare payments.

**This document is in:** [ Grants for home renovations and improvements
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-
improvements/)

  * [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/)

The Household Benefits Package helps you with the costs of running your
household. It includes electricity and gas allowances and a Free Television
Licence. It is paid to people over 70 and to people under 70 in some
circumstances.

**This document is in:** [ Extra social welfare benefits ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/)

  * [ Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/housing-assistance-payment/)

The Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) is a social housing support provided by
local authorities. Under the scheme, rent is paid directly to private
landlords and you pay a weekly contribution to your local authority.

**This document is in:** [ Help with renting ](/en/housing/renting-a-
home/help-with-renting/)

  * [ Financial supports for students ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/financial-supports-for-students/)

Information on other financial supports for students in further and higher
education.

**This document is in:** [ Fees and supports for third-level education
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/)
