##  Tuition fees

Each higher education institution sets its own tuition fee rates. In general,
they also charge a separate student contribution. You should contact the ones
you are interested in to find out what they require. You can find a [ list of
higher education institutions on the website of the Department of Education
and Skills. ](http://www.education.ie/en/Learners/Information/Providers-of-
Higher-Education/List.html)

**Free fees:** If you are an EEA or Swiss national and you have been normally
resident in the EEA or Switzerland for at least 3 of the 5 years before
beginning third-level education, you will not be charged fees for approved
full-time undergraduate courses in State-funded universities and institutes of
technology. Other people such as those with refugee status may also be
eligible for free fees. You may be eligible for [ a maintenance grant
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/student-grant-scheme/) . Funding is not awarded where students
already hold an undergraduate degree or are repeating a year.

**EU fees:** If you are an EEA or Swiss national who is not eligible for free
fees or if you have been tax resident in the EEA or Switzerland for a number
of years you may be eligible to pay fees at EU rates.

**Non-EU fees:** If you are applying for a place at third level as an overseas
student and you are not eligible for free fees or EU fee rates, you will be
charged full tuition fees and you will not be eligible for a maintenance
grant.

If you choose to enrol in a private college, you will have to pay fees. These
vary from college to college.

You can find more detailed information in our document on [ third-level
student fees and charges. ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-
supports-for-third-level-education/fees/)

**Tax relief:** You may be able to claim [ tax relief on third-level tuition
fees. ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)
