##  How to apply

To get a college place under the HEAR scheme you must [ apply online through
the CAO ](http://www.cao.ie/apply.php) . Your CAO application must reach the
CAO by **5pm 1 February 2024** . Late CAO applications are not considered for
HEAR.

When you are filling in the online CAO form you must complete the part of the
form to say you wish to apply for the HEAR scheme. You will then be directed
to a separate HEAR application form. You must complete this part of your
application by **5pm 1 March 2024** .

Then on the HEAR application form you must answer questions on your family’s
income, your parents’ employment status and the schools you attended.

By **5pm 15 March 2024** your supporting documents must reach the CAO,
providing evidence of your circumstances.

**No applications will be accepted after the closing dates.** The closing
dates are very strict because HEAR is an additional application procedure
which needs extra processing time.

You will be notified by email or through the cao.ie portal in late **June
2024** (after the Leaving Certificate examination) telling you whether you are
eligible for the scheme. If you are told you are not eligible you can ask for
your application to be reviewed. Your HEAR application does not affect your
CAO application, which will be processed in the usual way after you get your
Leaving Certificate results.

The CAO helpline at (091) 509 800 can assist school-leavers with their HEAR
application. You can find further information in this [ list of frequently
asked questions ](http://accesscollege.ie/hear/help/) on the [ Access College
website ](http://www.accesscollege.ie/) . You can also contact the access
services of the colleges participating in the HEAR scheme.

The HEAR programme runs nationwide [ information sessions
](http://accesscollege.ie/hear/events/) which aim to answer questions that
students (or their parents/guardians) may have about preparing the application
for HEAR.

You can download [ an application handbook and information leaflets
](http://accesscollege.ie/hear/making-an-application/handbooks-forms/) to help
with your application.

You can also access information about HEAR on [ Facebook
](http://www.facebook.com/accesscollege) .
