###  OFP and housing support

Most sources of income (including OFP) are taken into account in the means
test for social housing support and the calculation of differential rents.

If you are [ applying for social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-
social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/) , you should notify the
local authority of any change in your income so that your means can be
reassessed.

If you are already renting from a [ local authority
](http://www.housing.gov.ie/local-government/administration/local-
authorities/local-authorities) or a [ housing association ](/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) , you should notify
them of any change in your income so that your rent can be recalculated. If
you are renting under the [ Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/housing-assistance-payment/)
scheme, you should notify the local authority of any change in your income so
that your rent contribution can be recalculated.

If you are on Rent Supplement, any change in your circumstances may affect
your entitlement and you should notify the Department of Social Protection
office that pays your Rent Supplement. In particular, as noted above, you
cannot claim Rent Supplement if you are getting a student grant or if you are
in full-time education. There is also a limit to the number of hours you can
work per week and continue to get Rent Supplement. (Note, if you transfer to
HAP instead, you can work full-time and keep your entitlement to HAP.)

_**Page edited:** 4 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/moving-from-
ofp/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Transition%20from%20One-
Parent%20Family%20Payment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/moving-from-ofp/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/moving-from-
ofp/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Transition%20from%20One-
Parent%20Family%20Payment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/moving-from-ofp/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
