##  Settlement

Once a claim has been made, a settlement between all the parties can be
reached either prior to the trial date or on the day of the trial ("on the
steps of the courtroom").

If the defendant wishes to offer you money to end your claim and you are
agreeable to settling your case out of court, your solicitor may arrange a
settlement meeting with the defendant's legal representatives prior to the
trial date.

At the meeting, [ your legal representatives ](/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/) will explain to you the advantages and
disadvantages of accepting the offer made by the defendant and will give you
advice about your chances of success at trial and the amount of damages you
may receive in court.

The advantage to settling your case is that it removes the risk of losing the
case and/or having to pay the costs of the case. There is no guarantee that a
court will award you more damages than the sum offered by the defendant.

Your solicitor or your barrister will negotiate with the defendant's legal
representatives to reach a sum that is acceptable to all sides. Usually the
issue of who is to pay your legal costs is dealt with. You are not obliged to
accept the advice of your solicitor or barrister or to settle your claim and
the final decision will always be yours.

However, if you do agree to a settlement then that decision is final, the case
proceeds no further and you have forfeited your claim in return for the
mutually agreed sum. It is often the case that the terms of any settlement can
be made the subject of a court order or lodged in court to make it easier to
enforce the settlement agreement.

If the claim is made in the name of a child or a person who lacks mental
capacity, any settlement must be approved by the court.
