**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > Housing taxes and reliefs

#  Housing taxes and reliefs

  * [ Rent Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/rent-tax-credit/)

You can claim an income tax credit for rent paid. Find out how to qualify for
and apply for the credit.

  * [ Local Property Tax (LPT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax/)

The Local Property Tax (LPT) is payable on residential property. It is
collected by Revenue.

  * [ How to value your property for Local Property Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/valuing-property-for-lpt/)

Local Property Tax is a self-assessment tax. There are tools and information
sources that you can use to help you assess the value of your residential
property.

  * [ How to pay your Local Property Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/paying-local-property-tax/)

You can pay your Local Property Tax (LPT) in a variety of ways. This page
explains your options.

  * [ Deferring payment of the Local Property Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-tax/)

The Local Property Tax is a tax payable on residential property. This document
gives information about who qualifies for deferral and how to defer payment of
the tax.

  * [ Exemptions from Local Property Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax-exemptions/)

The Local Property Tax is a tax payable on residential property. This document
gives information about properties that are exempt from the tax.

  * [ Residential Zoned Land Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/residential-zoned-land-tax/)

A new Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) will be charged on land that is zoned
and serviced for residential use.

  * [ Vacant Homes Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/vacant-homes-tax/)

Vacant Homes Tax is an annual tax on residential property that is stayed in
for less than 30 days in a 12-month period.

  * [ Housing tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

You can claim tax relief on some housing expenses and income. Find out more.

**This document is in:** [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

  * [ Stamp duty on property ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/stamp-duty/)

Stamp duty is paid on the transfer of property

**This document is in:** [ Buying a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/)

  * [ Mortgage interest tax credit ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/mortgage-interest-relief/)

A mortgage interest tax credit or relief is a tax relief based on the amount
of qualifying mortgage interest that you pay in a tax year for your home. A
new temporary mortgage interest tax credit was announced in Budget 2024. The
previous scheme ended on 1 January 2021.

**This document is in:** [ Buying a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/)

  * [ Rent a room tax relief scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/)

Rent-a-room relief makes it possible to earn tax-free rental income when you
rent out a room in your home to private tenants.

**This document is in:** [ Owning your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/)

  * [ Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

**This document is in:** [ Help with renting ](/en/housing/renting-a-
home/help-with-renting/)
