##  Rules

As a self-employed person you pay income tax under [ the self-assessment
system ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/business/self-assessment.html) , once a
year. Self-assessment means that you are responsible for making your own
assessment of tax due.

You pay Preliminary Tax (an estimate of tax due for your current trading year)
on or before 31 October each year and make a tax return for the previous year
not later than 31 October. If you pay and file your tax return online using
the [ Revenue Online Service (ROS)
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/online/ros/index.html) , the deadline is usually
slightly later.

For example, if your accounting year is from 1 January to 31 December each
year, you pay Preliminary Tax for 2024 by 31 October 2024, based on an
estimate of your liability for the full year. At the same time, you make a tax
return for 2023 and pay any taxes outstanding for that year. You are entitled
to the normal income tax credits and reliefs.

For 2024, you can claim an [ Earned Income Tax Credit
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-
and-employment/earned-income-credit/index.aspx) of €1,875 (in 2023 the amount
was €1,775). However, if you also qualify for the [ Employee Tax Credit
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-
and-employment/employee-tax-credit/index.aspx) (formerly known as the PAYE tax
credit), the combined value of these credits cannot be greater than the value
of the Employee Tax Credit.

You must keep proper records which include:

  * All purchases and sales of goods and services and 
  * All amounts received and all amounts paid out 

You must keep supporting records (for example, invoices, bank and building
society statements, cheque stubs and receipts). You do not have to send them
in to Revenue, but you must keep them in case of a Revenue audit.

You can claim certain business expenses against tax. Some examples include:

  * Purchase of goods for re-sale 
  * Wages 
  * Rent 
  * Rates 
  * Repairs 
  * Lighting and heating 
  * Running costs of vehicles or machinery used in the business 
  * Accountancy fees 
  * Interest paid on business loans 
  * Leasing payments on vehicles or machinery used in the business 
  * Contributions to your personal pension (up to certain limits). 

If you are working from home you may be able to claim a proportion of
household bills such as telephone, heating, lighting and broadband.

You can find more information on self-employment in [ Revenue’s guide to self-
assessment ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/guide-to-self-assessment/index.aspx) , which includes information
about how to fill in your tax return and important deadlines. [ Revenue also
has information on registering for tax ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-
business/registering-for-tax/index.aspx) and about the business expenses that
you can claim against income. Your local Revenue office can also help you with
any questions that you may have.

**Subcontractors:** If you are a self-employed subcontractor working in
construction, forestry or meat processing there is [ detailed information
about Relevant Contracts Tax ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/rct/index.html) on
Revenue's website.
