###  Looking for a job in the EU

The [ EURES network ](https://ec.europa.eu/eures/public/homepage) was set up
by the European Commission to help European citizens looking for work in
another EU/EEA country. EURES has a network of advisers, known as EURES
advisers, who can give you general practical information on legislation,
social security, living conditions, useful addresses, information on pay
levels, taxes, contracts, recruitment practices, and other information.

EURES advisors have access to the EURES job vacancies database with vacancies
in the EU/EEA. If you are interested in working or seeking work within the
EU/EEA, you should make an appointment with your nearest EURES advisor.
Contact [ your nearest employment services office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/d6f636-employment-services-offices/) or [
Intreo centre ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Intreo---Contact-
Information.aspx) for more information.

You can also access the [ EURES job vacancies database
](http://ec.europa.eu/eures/home.jsp?lang=en) to find a job in another EU
country.

If you are unemployed, you have the right to live in another EU country for a
"reasonable period" of time in order to look for a job. In the absence of a
definition of "reasonable period", most EU countries are now operating a
6-month period, though some EU countries are still operating a 3-month period.

However, no matter how long it takes you to find a job, you cannot be asked to
leave the country if you can prove that you are genuinely looking for a job
and that you have a real chance of finding one. For example, if you still have
interviews or tests to attend.

You can register at employment agencies and centres without being resident in
the country in which you wish to work and you will be given the same help to
find work as nationals of that country.

**Transferring your unemployment benefit**

If you are getting unemployment benefit (for example, Jobseeker’s Benefit and
Jobseeker’s Benefit Self-Employed), [ you may continue to get the payment from
that same country for up to 13 weeks after you move to another member state.
](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/leaving-ireland-and-your-
social-security-entitlements/) You must have been getting the payment for at
least 4 weeks before you can transfer it to another country.

If you [ apply to transfer your benefit
](http://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/work/finding-job-abroad/transferring-
unemployment-benefits/index_en.htm) it will be paid directly to you. You must
still register with the employment services of the country where you have gone
to look for work within a week. You may transfer your benefit more than once
if you are looking for work in different EU/EEA states, but you cannot exceed
the maximum period of 13 weeks.

If you are leaving Ireland to move to Northern Ireland or Britain your Social
Welfare Local Office will issue you with the Form U2 (formerly Form E303)
which you take to the UK social services. If you are moving to another EU
country, the Department of Social Protection will send the U2 form to your new
address in that EU country.
