###  **Farm Succession Planning**

[ Farm succession planning ](/en/environment/land/farm-succession-planning/)
is the process of planning how you will transfer your farm to another person
when you retire or step back from farming. The plan covers how you will
transfer ownership of the farm, but can also involve transferring skills,
knowledge, and labour.

This can be a complex process, so you need to plan it carefully to avoid
family disputes and ensure you maximise any incentives.

You should also give yourself plenty of time to make the plan, as issues such
as paying into a pension for your retirement need to begin well before
transferring your farm.

**Get advice**

You should talk to your farm advisor first. They have a good understanding of
how your farm business works and have experience of other farm transfers so
can help with the process. They will also let you know how the transfer will
affect any schemes and at what stage you will need a solicitor and accountant.

**Talk to your family**

You should also make sure you include the whole family in the process. It can
be helpful to have an open discussion about who wants what before you make a
plan. More than one child may want to inherit the farm while in certain
situations, none of your children may want it.

If you are transferring the farm to one child, you may want to make other
arrangements for your other children to make sure they all benefit. For
example, giving a child who is not getting the farm a site or financial help.

**Plan for your retirement**

You will need to consider how you will manage financially when you transfer
the farm. For example, will you be old enough to get the [ old-age pension
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-contributory/) or a [ private pension
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/personal-pensions/) , or will you still get an income from
the farm? You may also need to consider housing arrangements if you are
currently living on the farm.
