###  Means test

Your income must be below a certain level to get Jobseeker’s Allowance.

To find out if your income is low enough to qualify for Jobseeker’s Allowance,
the DSP does a means test.

The means test looks at your income, savings, investments and property, but
not your own home. It includes [ your spouse’s, civil partner’s or
_cohabitant's_ income ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-
test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-couple/) . (A
cohabitant is a person living in an intimate and committed relationship with a
person of the same or opposite sex who is not that person’s spouse, civil
partner, or a close relative.) However, [ some income is not be taken into
account ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-
social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-
test/) in the means test.

To find your rate of Jobseeker’s Allowance, the DSP will deduct your total
means from the maximum payment for your household.

If your partner works or is taking part in Tús, their earnings are assessed in
the same way as earnings from any part-time work or casual work. Find out more
in our document about [ work and Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/) .

If your partner or cohabitant started a [ Community Employment (CE)
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-
schemes/community-employment-scheme/) scheme **before 1 January 2023** , their
earnings from the scheme are assessed in the same way as earnings from part-
time work. If they start CE in 2023, your means will be halved, you can find
more about [ how CE is assesssed in the means test for Jobseeker's Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/) .

A _limitation_ applies, which means that if you are claiming JA and your
partner is getting certain social welfare payments, the total amount paid to
you as a couple cannot be more than the maximum amount for one person
(including any dependants) on one social welfare payment.

Find out more in our page about [ the means test for Jobseeker’s Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/) .

If you are **24 or under** and living with a parent (or a step-parent) in the
family home, the JA means test will assess some of your parents’ income. Find
out more in our document about [ how living with your parents is assessed in
the means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-
for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-jobseekers-
allowance/) .
