##  Tests for people with a disability

You should notify the RSA’s [ Driver Testing Section
](https://www.rsa.ie/help-support/if-you-need-to-contact-us) in advance if
you:

  * Have a severe hearing problem 
  * Are restricted in your movements or have any disability which could affect your driving 
  * Drive an adapted vehicle 

This will ensure you don’t face any delays on the day of your test. Most
driving test centres in Ireland are wheelchair accessible, but you should
contact your selected centre in advance of your test to confirm this. You
should also note that if the vehicle you use for the test is adapted to suit a
disability (e.g., it has additional controls), this [ will be recorded on your
full driving licence ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/the-
driving-test/how-to-apply) .

Drivers with a disability are tested to the same standard and in the same way
as other drivers, but the test is conducted by a specially trained examiner
familiar with the techniques of disabled driving. You can access useful
information on driver assessment and instruction from the [ Disabled Drivers
Association of Ireland (DDAI) website ](https://www.ddai.ie/) .

You can request to be tested on your knowledge of the Rules of the Road in
your vehicle, rather than in the test centre, if you wish. If you have a
hearing impairment, an interpreter can assist you with answering questions on
the Rules of the Road. However, your interpreter must not be your driving
instructor and they cannot go with you on the practical part of your test.

If you have a disability, or if you are deaf or hard of hearing, you will be
given a little longer to go through the practical test of skills. However,
this does not mean you are allowed to drive more slowly during your test; you
need to maintain the same progress on the road as all other drivers in line
with [ national speed limits ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-
safety/road-traffic-speed-limits-in-ireland/) .
