###  Taxation issues

Landlords pay tax on rental income under [ Revenue's self-assessment system
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/it/leaflets/it10.html) . You can [ deduct the
interest on mortgages used to purchase, improve or repair rented property
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/rental-income/irish-rental-income/what-
expenses-are-allowed.aspx) when working out your rental income for tax
purposes.

You must show that you have registered all tenancies in the property with the
RTB. You can deduct 100% of the interest on these mortgages.

Interest is treated as accruing on a daily basis and the date the loan was
taken out is not relevant. Interest can only be deducted during the period in
which the property is let.

Landlords who rent residential property for 3 years to tenants who are getting
social housing supports can deduct all of the interest that accrues during
that 3-year period.

Social housing supports include:

  * The [ Housing Assistance Payment ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/housing-assistance-payment/)
  * The [ Rental Accommodation Scheme ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-scheme/)
  * [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/)

You must submit an undertaking to the RTB, stating that you commit to renting
a residential property to tenants on social housing supports for 3 years. The
RTB will register these undertakings in its Register of Tenancies. You can get
the form for registering an undertaking from the RTB.

If you [ rent out a room or flat in your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/) , you are exempt from income
tax on the amount that your tenant pays you for rent and other services, up to
€14,000 in a tax year. This exemption does not apply to income you get from [
renting your property for short-term lets ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/renting-your-property-for-shortterm-lets/) .

If you are living outside Ireland and your tenant pays rent directly to you,
the tenant must deduct tax from the gross rent and account for it to Revenue.
If the rent is being paid to a collection agent, the collection agent must
account for the tax. Read more in our document on [ tax issues for tenants
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/) .

**Rental income tax relief**

A temporary rental income tax relief was introduced in 2024 to support private
landlords. The Residential Premises Rental Income Relief (RPRIR) is available
against some rental income at the standard rate of 20% each year. It is from
2024 to 2027 and only applies if you keep the rental property in the rental
market for the next 4 years. You can get 20% of:

  * €3,000 for 2024 
  * €4,000 for 2025 
  * €5,000 for 2026 and 2027 

The relief reduces the tax due on rental income by up to €600 in 2024, €800 in
2025, and €1,000 in 2026 and 2027. The relief will be clawed back if you leave
the rental market during this time.

Revenue has more information about the [ Residential Premises Rental Income
Relief ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/land-and-property/rprir/index.aspx)
