##  The FET training allowance

If you are getting a social welfare payment, you may keep your social welfare
payment or transfer to a FET training allowance, when you take part in any of
the following:

  1. Traineeship Programme - see below 
  2. Specific Skills Training - see below 
  3. Community Training Centre (CTC) - see below 
  4. Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI) - see below 

You will transfer to a FET training allowance if you are getting:

  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)

1\. [ The Traineeship Programme
](https://www.solas.ie/programmes/traineeship/trainees/) provides training and
work experience. The duration of the programme will depend on [ your area of
training ](https://www.solas.ie/programmes/traineeship/) . When your initial
training is completed, you move back and forth between the centre and the
employer's workplace, further developing your skills.

2\. [ Specific Skills Training ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)
allows people who have lost their job or who are changing job to learn new
job-related skills. There are [ short and long day courses, online courses,
blended learning and evening courses
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/types) .

  * The courses vary from centre to centre and from year to year with different levels of certification. 
  * The courses are run during the day and in the evenings. 
  * Priority on daytime courses is given to unemployed people. A day course is free to all unemployed people, even if you are not getting a social welfare payment. 
  * An evening course is not free unless you are getting a social welfare payment. 

3\. [ Community Training Centres (CTCs)
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) are independent community-
based organisations, which provide training and education for early school
leavers, primarily aged between 16 and 21. Courses are generally for one year
and are full-time and lead to major awards on the [ National Framework of
Qualifications ](https://nfq.qqi.ie/) (NFQ) at Levels 3 and 4.

If you are aged under 18 and attending a Community Training Centre you will
get an age-related training allowance – see below.

4\. [ The Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI)
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) is for people who are
unemployed and experiencing difficulty in gaining entry to the labour market.
It is primarily for people aged 18 – 35. Courses are full-time and lead to
major awards on the NFQ at Levels 3, 4 and 5.
