###  Leases

The lease will say how much rent you have to pay, how often you have to pay it
and other conditions. Make sure that you understand the terms of the lease
before you sign it. A lease is a binding contract between you and the landlord
and contains important information on the terms of your tenancy. In
particular, it should say what will happen if either of you breaks the terms
of the agreement.

However, a lease should not contain terms that contradict the legal rights of
tenants and landlords. If this happens, your legal rights as a tenant or
landlord will overrule the terms in the lease. For example, your landlord
cannot enter the property at any time without your permission. This is the
case even if your lease states that the landlord may enter the property at any
time.

If you sign a lease together with other people, you each become responsible
for all the rent. So, if your fellow tenants cannot pay their share of the
rent, you may be legally liable for the entire amount. If you sign a lease on
your own on behalf of the other tenants, you become responsible for all the
rent.

If the yearly rent on the lease for residential accommodation is over â‚¬30,000,
the tenant is responsible for [ stamp duty
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/stamp-duty/property.html) on the annual rent.
It is your responsibility as a tenant to pay this to [ Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/index.html) .

Read [ more about leases ](http://www.threshold.ie/advice/seeking-private-
rented-accommodation/do-i-have-to-sign-a-lease/) on the website of Threshold,
the national housing charity.  
