###  Disqualification through conviction

Not all driving offences resulting in an automatic disqualification require
you to attend court. In most cases, a Garda will issue you with [ a fixed
charge notice ](https://www.garda.ie/en/Roads-Policing/Fixed-Charge-Notices/)
setting out the fine payable and you have the option of paying the fixed
charge and accepting the associated period of disqualification or allowing the
matter to proceed to court.

For example, if you hold a valid licence or learner permit at the time of
committing [ a drink driving offence ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/drink-driving-offences-in-ireland/) and
your alcohol level is below a certain limit, you may be issued with a fixed
charge. If you pay the fine stated on the notice within 28 days, the
disqualification order associated with the offence will be imposed but you
will not have to go to court.

However, the Garda√≠ do [ have the power to arrest you
](/en/justice/arrests/arrests/) for some offences, such as drink driving or
dangerous driving, and a small number of very serious offences result in [
automatic summons to court ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/summons/)
without the option of paying a fixed charge.

You can find out more about how [ criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-trial/) work. You can also read about [ criminal
legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid/) and the
services available from [ Free Legal Advice Centres (FLAC) and Citizen
Information Services ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/free-legal-advice-
centre/) .
