###  Extra payment for partner and child

If you have an adult or child dependants, the set rate of Maternity Benefit is
compared to the rate of Illness Benefit that would be paid to you if you were
absent from work through illness. The higher of the two rates is paid to you.

Although the Illness Benefit (IB) rate begins from a lower personal rate (€232
in 2024), it can include extra payments for your family, and this is why,
depending on the circumstances of your partner and how many children you have,
the rate paid to you may be higher than the set Maternity Benefit rate. You
don’t apply for IB, but your Maternity Benefit will be increased to the IB
rate if it is higher.

**Example (2024 rates)** :

Mary is entitled to the set Maternity Benefit rate of €274. Her partner is
unemployed and signing on for [ unemployment credits ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-
insurance-contributions/) . They have two children under 12 years of age.

If she got [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/illness-benefit/) , she would get €478 (this is the personal rate of
Illness Benefit + an Increase for a Qualified Adult + Increases for 2
Qualified Children under 12). She cannot get less Maternity Benefit than she
would get if ill and getting Illness Benefit. For this reason, she will get
Maternity Benefit of €478.

If your adult dependant is getting a social welfare payment, you will not get
an Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA) but you may get a half-rate [ Increase
for a Qualified Child (IQC) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/) .

You will qualify for a full-rate IQA and a full-rate IQC if your adult
dependant is unemployed and signing on for credits or earning under €100.01
per week.

If your adult dependant is earning between €100.01 and €310 per week, you will
get a tapered rate of IQA and a full-rate IQC. If your adult dependant is
earning between €310.01 and €400 per week, you will not get an IQA but you
will get half-rate IQC. If your adult dependant earns over €400 per week, you
will not get an IQA or IQC.
