##  Motorcycle driving tests

The motorcycle test is similar to that for cars and work vehicles. The RSA
recommend that you prepare for your motorcycle test by studying the [ Rules of
the Road booklet (pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/road-
safety/rules-of-the-road.pdf?sfvrsn=e0334acb_0) and by practise riding as much
as possible on all types of roads and in all types of traffic situations.

You can access [ detailed information on the motorcycle test
](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/the-driving-test/driving-test-
vehicles/motorcycle) and the motorcycle licencing system on the RSA website.
The RSA have also produced [ several instructional videos
](https://www.rsa.ie/en/RSA/Learner-Drivers/Motorcyclists/Learning-to-drive-
videos/) to support learner riders in preparing for a test.

**Technical checks**

Before you begin the practical test of skills, the examiner will check your
technical knowledge of the motorcycle. You will be asked how a technical check
on 3 parts of your motorcycle would be performed. This can include, tyres,
steering, brakes, chain, reflectors, indicators, lights (including dipping the
headlight), oil level and emergency stop switch (if fitted).

You will also be asked to put the machine off (and back on) its stand (or
side-stand). You will also be asked to move the motorcycle approximately 5
metres forward or backwards with the engine off.

**Practical test of skills**

You will be given clear instructions before your test on the route to take.
The driver tester will be following you in a car or motorcycle. In exceptional
circumstances, i.e., very heavy traffic congestion, the tester may observe you
on foot.

Motorcycle tests will be carried out using radio controls. You will be given
the radio equipment and advice on how to use it at the test centre.

  * You will be assessed in the following situations: 
  * Moving off 
  * Riding in traffic 
  * Riding left-hand circuits 
  * Riding right-hand circuits 

You will also be required to do a U-turn within the width of the road to
demonstrate that you have good control of your motorcycle in a confined space.

You will then be asked to ride slowly, at "walking pace" for around 50 metres
to demonstrate that you have adequate control of your vehicle.

**Getting your result**

When you return to the test centre, your examiner will bring you back into the
examination room to give you the result. If you fail your motorcycle test, you
will be given a detailed list of your mistakes and must apply to take the test
again at a later date.

If you pass, you will be given a Certificate of Competency, which is valid for
2 years. A Certificate of Competency is not a full licence and it does not
entitle you to drive on a motorway or to carry a pillion passenger. If you
fail to apply for a full licence during this 2 year period, you will have to
take your driving test again.
