##  Preparing for and taking a test

A driving test is designed to make sure that you:

  * Know the Rules of the Road 
  * Possess the knowledge and skill to drive competently in accordance with those rules 
  * Drive with proper regard for the safety and convenience of other road users 

The test lasts about 30 to 40 minutes, depending on traffic conditions. At the
beginning of the test, you will be asked technical questions about the rules
of the road, the functionality of your car, and you may also be asked to point
out different parts under the bonnet, such as how to check oil levels, or
which part is the engine.

You will then drive about five miles in a variety of road and traffic
conditions and will be examined on your practical skills.

**Preparing for your test**

To prepare for your test you should:

  * Study the RSA’s [ Rules of the Road booklet (pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/road-safety/rules-of-the-road.pdf?sfvrsn=e0334acb_0) . This publication can also be bought in hardcopy from bookshops for a fee of €5. 
  * Read the RSA’s [ Preparing for Your Driving Test ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/the-driving-test/what-it-is) . 
  * Study the RSA’s [ Learning to Drive ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers) for car, bike, bus and truck. 
  * Practice driving as much as possible on all types of roads and in all types of traffic situations with an ADI. 

The RSA have created a dedicated website, [ passthetest.ie
](http://www.passthetest.ie/) which provides a range of free supporting
information and [ instructional videos ](https://passthetest.ie/learning-to-
drive-videos/) about how to pass your driving test.

The RSA have also published a useful [ ‘Checklist for your Driving Test’
booklet (pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/services/s1.5-driving-
test/checklist-for-your-driving-test.pdf?sfvrsn=3757eef2_7) to help you
prepare for the day of your test. It provides practical details about what to
expect on the day of your test and what you need to take with you to the
testing centre. You can also [ watch a video ](https://youtu.be/W4eMWyVTwfI)
of what will happen during the driving test itself.

**Technical checks**

First you will be asked some questions on the Rules of the Road. Next, if you
are doing a driving test for categories B (car), EB (car with trailer) and W
(work vehicle), you must explain some technical checks.

The instructor will bring you out to your vehicle and will ask how you would
carry out a technical check on three of the following: steering, horn, brakes,
tyres, lights, reflectors, indicators, engine oil, coolant, and windscreen
washer fluid. To get access to some of these parts, you will have to show how
to open the bonnet and close it securely. The RSA has more detailed
information on [ technical checks for all motor vehicles
](https://www.rsa.ie/road-safety/road-users/car-drivers/car-maintenance) .

If you are doing a test for categories C1, C, EC1 and EC (truck and trucks
with trailers), you will be asked how you would carry out a technical check on
three of the same items above. To get access to some of these parts, you may
have to open and securely close the bonnet and certain panels. You can [
access detailed information ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/professional-
drivers/cpc/become-a-professional-cpc-driver) about getting a Certificate of
Professional Competence (CPC) for buses and trucks on the RSA website.

**Practical test of skills**

The practical part of your test will take approximately 30 minutes to
complete. The examiner will give you clear instructions throughout the test,
but if you don’t understand something, ask them to repeat it.

Do not panic if you make a mistake during the test. It may not be as serious
as you think and it may not mean you have failed.

You will be assessed in the following situations:

  * Moving off 
  * Driving in traffic 
  * Stopping 
  * Reversing round a corner 
  * Performing a turnabout 
  * Performing a hill start 
  * Parking 

The aspects of your driving that will be assessed include:

  * Road positioning 
  * Overtaking and passing 
  * Anticipation and observation 
  * Use of mirrors and signals 
  * Progress 
  * Speed 
  * Compliance with traffic lights 
  * Road signs and road markings 
  * Proper use of your vehicle controls 

You can also expect to make a number of left and right turns, encounter a
roundabout and stop at traffic lights. At some point during your test, the
examiner will ask you to demonstrate hand signals.

**Getting your result**

When you return to the test centre, your examiner will bring you back into the
examination room to give you the result. [ If you pass
](https://www.rsa.ie/en/RSA/Learner-Drivers/The-Driving-Test/After-you-pass/)
, you will be given a Certificate of Competency, which is valid for 2 years.
Once you have this certificate, you can apply for a full driving licence. If
you do not apply for a full licence during the 2 year period, you will have to
take your driving test again.

It is important to note, however, that a Certificate of Competency is not a
licence, and a driver holding one cannot drive on a motorway, remove their ‘L’
plates or drive unaccompanied until they possess their full licence. A person
granted a first full driving licence must also display ‘N’ plates on their
vehicle for a period of 2 years.

If you fail your driving test, you will be given a detailed list of your
mistakes. You should study the list and work on the mistakes before you [ sit
another driving test ](https://www.rsa.ie/en/RSA/Learner-Drivers/The-Driving-
Test/Repeating-your-test/) . You will automatically get an invitation for
another test in 6-8 weeks.
