##  Maintenance

The recognition and enforcement of maintenance orders in EU member states is
governed by [ Regulation 4/2009 ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1422886426094&uri=URISERV:jl0024) (also known as ‘the
Maintenance Regulation’). Its objective is to help a maintenance creditor
(applicant) to establish easily, quickly and generally free of charge, an
order which can be enforced throughout the European Union. It does this by
providing for common rules in relation to jurisdiction, applicable law,
recognition, enforcement, cooperation and standardised documents. It covers
maintenance obligations which arise from:

  * Family relationships 
  * Parentage 
  * Marriage or affinity 

It means that a person who has an order for the payment of maintenance given
in an Irish court is in a position to look for recovery of that amount in
another EU country. The same service is available to those in other EU member
states who are seeking recovery of maintenance against debtors (respondents)
living in Ireland.

Under the Regulation, each member state has a Central Authority. The Central
Authority in Ireland is the [ Department of Justice
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/WP15000151) . The central authorities
co-operate with each other in facilitating the operation of the Regulation.
They also assist individuals in relation to applications available under the
Regulation, particularly with regard to the transmission and receipt of
applications, the initiation of related proceedings for the establishment or
modification of maintenance, and for the enforcement of a maintenance
decision.

[ Regulation 805/2004
](http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/judicial_cooperation_in_civil_matters/l33190_en.htm)
of 21 April 2004 created a European Enforcement Order for uncontested orders –
including maintenance orders – that came into effect in Ireland on 21 October
2005. Its provisions for maintenance orders were replaced by the Maintenance
Regulation, except for European enforcement orders concerning maintenance
obligations issued by member states that are not bound by the [ 2007 Hague
Protocol ](http://www.hcch.net/index_en.php?act=conventions.text&cid=133) on
the law applicable to maintenance obligations. Only Denmark is not bound by
the 2007 Hague Protocol.
