**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> Social insurance (PRSI)

#  Social insurance (PRSI)

  * Overview 

[ Social insurance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/social-insurance/)

Social insurance contributions entitle you to a range of benefits administered
by the Department of Social Protection.

  * [ Social insurance classes ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-classes/)

The social welfare benefits you can get are determined by the PRSI Class you
are in. An overview of social insurance classes.

  * [ Part-time work and social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-time-work-and-social-insurance-prsi/)

This page explains how part-time work can affect your PRSI contributions.

  * [ Paying social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/)

Paying PRSI can entitle you to certain social welfare benefits. The law makes
your employer responsible for PRSI. This document explains your employer's
duty to pay PRSI.

  * [ Homemaker's Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/homemakers-scheme/)

If you care full-time for children, or for an ill or disabled person, the
Homemakerâ€™s Scheme makes it easier for you to qualify for a State Pension
(Contributory).

  * [ HomeCaring Periods Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/homecaring-periods-scheme/)

The HomeCaring Periods Scheme can help you get a higher rate of State Pension
(Contributory) if you spent time out of work to care full-time for a child
aged under 12, or a person aged 12 or over (including an adult) who needed an
increased level of care.

  * [ Benefit and contribution years for social welfare purposes ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/benefit-and-contribution-years-for-social-welfare/)

To qualify for most social insurance payments, you must first have a certain
number of PRSI contributions paid since you started work. Find out which years
count as benefit and contribution years for social welfare purposes.

  * [ Credited social insurance contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/)

A credited social insurance contribution is a contribution given to you and
recorded on your social insurance record. This page explains the rules on
credited contributions for students, carers, homemakers, voluntary development
workers and people who retire early.

  * [ Voluntary social insurance contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-contributions/)

Voluntary social insurance contributions can help you qualify for a social
insurance payment in the future. Find out more about making voluntary
contributions.

  * [ Class S PRSI ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-prsi/)

Information on Class S PRSI contributions paid by self-employed people.

  * [ Long-Term Carers Contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/long-term-carers-contributions/)

The Long-Term Carers Contribution Scheme makes it easier for people who take
time out of their working life to provide care to qualify for a State Pension
(Contributory).
