###  Students

If you are a [ non-EEA national coming to study in Ireland ](/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/immigration-nonEEA-students/)
you must be enrolled in a full-time course on the [ Interim List of Eligible
Programmes (ILEP) ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-
ireland/frequently-asked-questions-for-students/) . If you are attending a
course on the ILEP you will have _stamp number 2_ endorsed on your passport.
You will be allowed to take up casual employment of up to 20 hours part-time
work per week in term time or up to 40 hours per week during holiday periods
(June to September and 15 December to 15 January). If you are not attending a
course on the Interim List of Eligible Programmes, you will not be entitled to
take up part-time work or engage in any business or profession. You will get
_stamp number 2A_ on your passport.

**Third Level Graduate Scheme:** Non-EEA students who have graduated with a
degree at level 8 or above from an Irish third-level institution and have a
current Certificate of Registration may be permitted to apply for the [ Third
Level Graduate Scheme ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-
changed-since-i-arrived-in-ireland/third-level-graduate-programme/) . This
scheme provides an extension of their permission to remain for 12 or 24 months
to allow them to seek employment and obtain a [ Critical Skills Employment
Permit ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/green-card-
permits/) or [ General Employment Permit ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/work-permits/) . If they are granted permission to
remain, [ they will get stamp 1G
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-
permission/information-on-registering/immigration-permission-stamps/) .
