###  De facto relationships

Non-EEA nationals who are in de facto relationships must have permission to
remain in the State. They can apply for a [ de facto partnership immigration
permission ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-
arrived-in-ireland/de-facto-partner-of-an-irish-or-non-eea-national/) .

A non-EEA national whose partner is an Irish national or an Irish resident
must provide proof of cohabitation of at least 2 years. If the resident is a
non-EEA national, they must have a _stamp 1, 4_ or _5_ residence permission to
sponsor an application. Non-EEA nationals with _stamp 2_ or _3_ permission are
not eligible to be sponsors.

You can find the [ application form ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/application-for-permission-de-facto-partner.pdf) , the
guidelines for applicants, details of the evidence to be submitted and a list
of frequently asked questions on the website [ irishimmigration.ie
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-
ireland/de-facto-partner-of-an-irish-or-non-eea-national/#faqs) .

ISD will not accept an application for de facto partnership immigration
permission if you are in Ireland on a [ short stay C visa
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-my-
study-visa-options/how-to-apply-for-a-short-c-visit-study-visa/) or the [
Irish Short Stay Visa Waiver Programme
](https://www.dfa.ie/media/dfa/alldfawebsitemedia/travel/info-note-short-stay-
visa-waiver-programme.pdf) .

If you intend to travel to Ireland on or after 1 November 2019 to join your de
facto partner who is an Irish national, you must have [ immigration
preclearance ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/Non-
EEA-De-Facto-Partners-of-Irish-Nationals.pdf) before you travel to Ireland.
This process applies to both non-visa required and visa required non-EEA
nationals. You can read about [ returning to Ireland with your de facto
partner ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-
ireland-with-your-de-facto-partner/) .

If you are a non-EEA national whose partner is an EU national (but not an
Irish national) you can apply for a [ residence card under EU Treaty Rights
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-join-family-in-ireland/joining-an-
eea-or-swiss-national/eu-treaty-rights/) if you have proof of living together
in a durable relationship of at least 2 years.
