##  Appealing the decision in a civil case

If you are unhappy with the result of your case, you may wish to appeal your
case to a higher court. You are normally limited to only one appeal of any
decision made.

If your case was commenced in the District Court, it can be appealed to the
Circuit Court. A case commenced in the Circuit Court may be appealed to the
High Court. A High Court case may be appealed to the Court of Appeal or the
Supreme Court in exceptional circumstances.

There are relatively strict time limits in place for lodging appeals and if
you do intend to appeal, you should be aware of these timelines.

You may choose to appeal the original judge's decision in its entirety, i.e.,
their decision on who was to blame and the damages awarded (if they were
awarded). In this event, the appeal court may:

  * Agree with the decision of the original court and uphold it 
  * Disagree with the decision of the original court and overturn it 
  * Increase or decrease the amount of damages awarded 

If you are happy with the decision made by the original judge in relation to
who was at fault but unhappy with the amount of damages they have awarded, you
may appeal the amount of damages awarded only. Then the appeal court may
either increase or decrease the amount of damages awarded by the original
judge.

It may be the case that you appeal against the level of damages awarded to you
but the other side also appeal the decision that they must pay damages, or
vice versa.

If you lose your appeal, you will likely have to pay the costs of both sides
so any offers to settle made by the other side should be seriously considered.

Further information on appeals from the Circuit Court to the High Court is
available on the Courts Service website, including [ appeals from the District
Court to the Circuit Court ](https://www.courts.ie/appeals-circuit-court) and
[ appeals from the Circuit Court to the High Court ](https://courts.ie/appeal-
circuit-court) .

_**Page edited:** 20 August 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-case/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Taking%20and%20appealing%20a%20civil%20case&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-case/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-case/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Taking%20and%20appealing%20a%20civil%20case&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-case/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
