###  Solidarity

**Article 27** : Workers’ right to information and consultation within the
undertaking – workers (or their representatives) must be consulted in
situations that are covered by EU law (for example, [ transfer of undertakings
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/transfer-of-business/) ).

**Article 28** : Right of collective bargaining and action – both employers
and workers have the right to negotiate collective agreements, and to take
collective decisions to protect their interests (for example, [ to take strike
action ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-
and-trade-unions/trade-disputes/) ).

**Article 29** : Right of access to placement services – free placement
services should be available to assist people to look for work.

**Article 30** : Protection in the event of [ unjustified dismissal.
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/)

**Article 31** : Fair and just working conditions – this includes the right to
[ safe working conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-work/) , a maximum [ working week,
rest periods ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/hours-of-
work/work-breaks-and-rest-periods/) and to [ annual leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-
leave/) .

**Article 32** : Prohibition of child labour and [ protection of young people
at work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/young-people-at-
work/rights-of-young-workers/) \- the minimum age for working cannot be below
the minimum age for leaving school except in limited circumstances.

**Article 33** : Family and professional life – this includes the protection
of pregnant workers and parents on [ maternity ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) or [ parental
leave. ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/parental-leave/)

**Article 34** : Social security and social assistance.

**Article 35** : Health care- under the conditions established by national
law.

**Article 36** : Access to services of general economic interest – this allows
member states to put in place extra assistance for disadvantaged areas.

**Article 37** : Environmental protection – policies of the EU should be
sustainable.

**Article 38** : Consumer protection.
