###  Jobseeker's Allowance, Disability Allowance or Farm Assist

For Jobseeker's Allowance, Disability Allowance, Pre-Retirement Allowance or
Farm Assist your means are assessed against the maximum household payment for
your circumstances. Your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant and any dependant
children you may have, are included to find the maximum household payment.
Even if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is not dependent on you and
has income in his or her own right, any assessable income they may have is
subtracted from the maximum weekly rate of payment for your circumstances.

For example, if you are married and have two children under 12 years of age
and apply for JA, the maximum family payment you could get is €450 (this
figure is made up of personal rate of €220 plus a qualified adult rate of €146
and two qualified child increases of €42). Any assessable income you or your
spouse has is deducted from this family payment. (Income from some sources is
not assessed and there are disregards for income from employment, see our
document, [ Work and Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-
allowance/) for more information.)

However if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant has a social welfare
payment in their own right (with some exceptions such as Child Benefit,
Domiciliary Care Allowance, and Supplementary Welfare Allowance) you _cannot_
claim an Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA) for them. This means you are
paid as a single person plus a half-rate increase for each qualified child.
(Your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant will get a half-rate increase for
each qualified child with their payment.) In this case, half of your combined
means are taken into account in the means test.
