###  What is overholding?

Overholding is when you stay in your rented accommodation after the tenancy
termination date given on a valid notice of termination. Overholding is a
breach of your tenancy agreement and the landlord’s rights. It sometimes
happens when tenants can’t find somewhere else to rent when their tenancy
ends. The fact that you can’t find alternative accommodation doesn’t mean that
you have any right to remain in your rented accommodation.

If you are overholding, you should keep up your tenant obligations, such as
paying the rent. Your landlord is not agreeing to continue the tenancy by
accepting the rent.

If you are overholding, your landlord will probably [ refer the dispute to the
Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/) to get you to leave. The RTB
will adjudicate on the issue and may issue a determination order ordering you
to leave. If you stay in your rented accommodation after you get the RTB
determination order to leave, your landlord can go to District Court to get
the order enforced and have you evicted. If you go to court for overholding,
you may have to pay your landlord’s legal costs as well as your own.

If you are [ renting a room in your landlord’s home ](/en/housing/renting-a-
home/sharing-accommodation-with-your-landlord#la4956) you are not covered by
residential tenancies legislation so the process is different. Your landlord
can go to court to get an injunction to get you to leave, or they may change
the locks.

Overholding can make it more difficult to find rented accommodation in the
future, as your landlord may not want to give you a reference. You can find [
more information about overholding on the RTB website
](https://www.rtb.ie/during-a-tenancy/overholding) .
