##  Protecting yourself or your employees from asbestos in work

There are [ regulations
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/your_industry/chemicals/legislation_enforcement/asbestos/legislation_and_guidance/asbestos_legislation/)
in place protecting workers from risks related to asbestos exposure at work.
They apply to all places of work and all sectors of work where asbestos-
containing materials may be present, and to everyone who may be at risk from
exposure when at work.

The [ Health and Safety Authority (HSA) ](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/) enforces
these regulations. While the HSA deals specifically with worker protection and
the industrial sector, if you are having work done in your home then it can be
deemed a workplace, and people working there must get the required level of
protection for them to do their work safely.

**What is the exposure limit for asbestos?**

The maximum level of daily exposure to which workers may be exposed at a
workplace is defined in law. This exposure limit is 0.1 fibres per cm3 for all
types of asbestos (or 100 fibres per litre of air).

If planned asbestos–related work could expose you or other workers to a higher
concentration of asbestos fibres in the air, your employer must submit a
written notification to the HSA 14 days before starting any work.

Employers who are responsible for people working in an environment with
possible asbestos must act to protect their employees’ health. The steps to be
taken include:

  * Identify any asbestos before work begins and plan the work to disturb them as little as possible 
  * Prepare a written risk assessment and a written plan of work or method statement 
  * Tell employees the results of any measurement of asbestos dust in the air in their work area 
  * Prevent employees' exposure to asbestos or do everything possible to keep the amount of asbestos in the air to a minimum 
  * Use specialist contractors for any work that involves significant risk of exposure – these specialists must use suitable controls, such as dust extractors and decontamination units 
  * Provide suitable protective gear for the type of work and the level of asbestos in the air 
  * Provide information, instruction and training, so that employees know what risks are involved and what precautions they should take 
  * Properly dispose of any waste that contains asbestos 

You can find detailed information and advice in the HSA’s [ practical
guidelines (pdf)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Chemical_and_Hazardous_Substances/asbestos_guidelines.pdf)
on how to manage and contain asbestos in workplaces.

The HSA has also published an [ Asbestos Information Sheet
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Chemical_and_Hazardous_Substances/Asbestos_Information_Sheet.html)
, aimed at employees and safety representatives, as well as employers.

**Site inspections**

The HSA can inspect sites where work with asbestos is being carried out.
Inspectors can visit a site without giving notice and they must be given full
access to all areas of that site to ensure that regulations are being met.

The HSA’s inspectors can close down a site immediately if they believe that
dangerous practices are in place. They can place a prohibition notice on the
site or specific operation. This notice remains in place until the problem has
been fixed.
