##  Criminal offences under the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) Act 2015

The Act introduces specific criminal offences.

It is an offence to use fraud, coercion, or undue influence to force another
person to make, change or revoke a [ decision-making assistance agreement
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-assistance-agreement/) ,
[ co-decision-making agreement ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/co-
decision-making-agreement/) , [ enduring power of attorney ](/en/death/before-
a-death/power-of-attorney/) or [ advance healthcare directive
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/advance-care-directives/) .

A person guilty of such an offence is liable on summary conviction to a class
A fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or both, and on
conviction to a fine of up to €50,000 or imprisonment for a term up to 5
years.

Making a false statement when registering a [ co-decision-making agreement
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/co-decision-making-agreement/) or [
enduring power of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/) is
also an offence. A person found guilty of this offence is liable on summary
conviction to a class A fine or imprisonment for a term up to 6 months, or
both, and on conviction to a fine of up to €15,000 or imprisonment for up to 2
years, or both.

If you are appointed to support somebody in one of the arrangements, it is an
offence if you ill-treat or wilfully neglect the person. Anyone guilty of such
an offence is liable on summary conviction to a class A fine or imprisonment
for term not exceeding 12 months, or both, and on conviction to a fine of up
to €50,000 or imprisonment for up to 5 years, or both.

If you fail to engage with an [ investigation of the Decision Support Service
](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/services/complaints/what-happens-after-
you-make-complaint) or obstruct such an investigation you may be liable on
summary conviction to a class A fine.
