##  How do tax credits work?

Tax is calculated as a percentage of your income. Your tax credits are
deducted from this to give the amount of tax that you have to pay. A tax
credit will reduce your tax by the amount of the credit.

Everyone is entitled to a personal tax credit. There are personal tax credits
for:

  * Single people 
  * People who are married or in a civil partnership 
  * People who are widowed or are surviving civil partners 

If you are in employment, getting a pension or getting a [ taxable social
welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-
social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/) (such as
Jobseeker’s Benefit) you are also entitled to the [ Employee Tax Credit
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-
and-employment/employee-tax-credit/index.aspx) (formerly known as the PAYE tax
credit) of €1,875.

So, for example, if you are single and in employment you are entitled to an
annual personal tax credit of €1,875 and the Employee Tax Credit of €1,875.
When the total amount of tax you owe is calculated, both of these (€3,750)
will be deducted from it.

This means that if you earn €18,750 or less you do not pay any income tax
(because your tax credits of €3,750 are more than or equal to the amount of
tax you are due to pay). However you may need to pay a [ Universal Social
Charge ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) (if your
income is over €13,000) and [ PRSI ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) (depending on how much you
earn each week).

If you are married or in a civil partnership, you have the option of sharing
tax credits and tax bands between you and your spouse or civil partner. If one
spouse or civil partner works in the home, caring for one or more dependent
people, you may be able to claim a [ Home Carer Tax credit ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/home-carers-tax-credit/) . You can read
more about [ taxation of married people and civil partners ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/) .
