###  Assessment 4: John and Mary claim separate jobseeker’s payments

1\. John’s JA claim for himself only:

Personal rate €232

No IQA

Half-rate IQC €50 (IQC for 2 children - one child under 12 and one child 12 or
over)

Total €282

Less means €49 (half Mary’s means – see Note 1 and 3 below)

Less means €18 (half John’s means – see Note 2 and 3 below)

**Total JA for John €215**

2\. Mary’s JB claim for herself only:

Personal rate €232

No IQA

Half IQC €50 (for 2 children)

Total JB €282

However, because she is working part-time 3 days each week, she will get two-
fifths (40%) of €282.

**Mary’s JB payment is €112.80** \- payment for 3 days of unemployment.

**Maximum payment rule:**

€215 + €112.80 = €327.80, this amount is less than the maximum payment of €486
(see note 4), so John’s JA payment will not be reduced.

Total income for Assessment 4:  Add their sources of income together to find
their total income:  John’s JA payment + John’s income from work + Mary’s JB
payment + Mary’s income from work = total income  €215 + €100 + €112.80 + €224
= €651.80  **Total income = €651.80**  
---  
  
**Conclusion**

In this case study, the family are better off with Assessment 1 (John claims
JA for the whole family).

However, assessment 4 (John and Mary claim separate jobseeker payments) might
be better since both partners are eligible for training and education schemes
in their own right.

**Note 1**

Mary’s means from work for John’s JA assessment are calculated as follows:

Income from work of €224 less €20 for each day worked up to a maximum of €60
(3 days). 60% of the balance is assessed as means.

€224 - €60 = €164

60% of €164 = €98 (rounded)

Mary’s means are calculated as **€98**

**Note 2**

John’s means from work for JA are calculated as follows:

**1\. Calculate John’s average daily earnings:**

Get his total weekly assessable earnings from employment and divide by the
number of days he worked that week.

Total weekly earnings ÷ number of days worked = average daily earnings.

€100 ÷ 2 = €50

**2\. Next calculate John’s daily means from work**

First disregard any income not taken into account. Income not taken into
account is €20 for each day worked up to a maximum of €60 (3 days). Then 60%
of the balance is assessed as means.

Average daily earnings - €20 = total

Total x 60% = daily means from work.

€50 – €20 = 30

30 x 60% = €18

**3\. Finally, find John’s weekly means from work**

Multiply his daily means by the number of days worked.

Daily means from work x number of days worked = weekly means from work.

€18 x 2 = €36

John’s means are assessed as **€36**

**Note 3**

**Joint means are halved if** spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is:

  * Getting a social welfare payment (except Child Benefit, Early Childcare Supplement, Disablement Pension, a guardian's payment, Supplementary Welfare Allowance, Domiciliary Care Allowance or half-rate Carer's Allowance) 
  * On a Further Education and Training (FET) course or on a VTOS course and getting an allowance in their own right 

Mary’s means from work is €98 – see ‘Note 1’ above. John’s means from work is
€36 – see ‘Note 2’ above.

In Assessments 3 and 4, the couples combined means is halved because both are
getting social welfare payments. In Assessment 3 Mary is getting WFP and John
is getting JA. In Assessment 4 Mary is getting JB and John is getting JA.

As a result, Mary’s means is €49 and John’s means is €18 for Assessments 3 and
4.

**Note 4**

Maximum payment rule:

If one of a couple is claiming Jobseeker's Allowance and the other is getting
of one of the social welfare payments listed below, **the total amount paid to
the couple cannot exceed the maximum amount paid to one person (including
dependants) on one social welfare payment** . However, you can choose the
higher-rate payment as the primary payment.

  * Illness Benefit 
  * Disablement Pension (when paid with Illness Benefit or Incapacity Supplement) 
  * Injury Benefit 
  * Invalidity Pension 
  * State Pension (Non-Contributory) 
  * State Pension (Contributory) 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Farm Assist 

Where the spouse, civil partner or cohabitant of a JA claimant is getting JB,
the Department of Social Protection assesses the maximum payment based on the
premise that the person is fully unemployed. This means, if the claimant is
getting a reduced JB (for example 2 days JB) because they are working, they
will be assessed as though they are getting full-rate JB.

In the case study above, the maximum payment for the family is: Personal rate
+ IQA + IQC (full rate for 2 children) = maximum payment for the family

€232 + €154 + €100 = €458

In Assessment 4 of the case study, John’s JA payment and Mary’s JB payment
combined are less than the maximum payment for the family, as a result, there
is no change to John’s JA payment.

If Mary and John’s combined JA and JB payment was greater than the maximum
payment for the family, John’s JA payment would be reduced by the difference.

_**Page edited:** 16 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
maximising-social-welfare-income-for-a-
couple/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Case%20study%3A%20Maximising%20a%20couple%27s%20income%20from%20jobseeker%27s%20%20payments&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
maximising-social-welfare-income-for-a-couple/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
maximising-social-welfare-income-for-a-
couple/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Case%20study%3A%20Maximising%20a%20couple%27s%20income%20from%20jobseeker%27s%20%20payments&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
maximising-social-welfare-income-for-a-couple/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
