####  Option 2: Continue to get your One-Parent Family Payment, Jobseeker's
Transitional payment, Disability Allowance, Invalidity Pension or Illness
Benefit

If you continue to get your One-Parent Family Payment, Jobseeker's
Transitional payment, Disability Allowance, Invalidity Pension or Illness
Benefit, you will:

  * Keep your existing payment 
  * Be entitled to apply for both the maintenance and fee components of the student grant and a postgraduate fee contribution (if relevant). (Note that applicants on social welfare payments do not automatically qualify for a grant) 
  * In general, lose your [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) , because you are in full-time education 
  * Note that if your course requires you to travel abroad for an Erasmus year, your primary payment will not continue to be paid while abroad. You must weigh up your income support options over the duration of your college course. 

If you have a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , you are entitled to retain it for a period of 3 years
from the date of entry to full-time education, after which you will be re-
assessed.

If you are currently getting the One-Parent Family Payment, changes in your
family circumstances while you are in full-time education might affect your
eligibility for the payment (for example, if a child no longer lives with you
or goes over the age limit). You should factor any such changes into your
planning for income support during your course.

From 4 July 2013, if you had opted to stay on your OFP and go back to
education but no longer qualify for OFP due to changes in the ages limits you
may be admitted to BTEA ‘mid course’. However you cannot get BTEA and a
student grant together.

There is a special arrangement for people whose OFP claim ended on 2 July
2015. If you had opted to stay on your OFP and go back to education but no
longer qualify for OFP because your youngest child is 7 years of age or over,
you can stay on OFP until you finish your course. You can continue to claim a
maintenance grant. **This arrangement was only for people whose OFP claim
ended on** **2 July 2015** .

A separate arrangement is now in place where you can move to the Jobseeker's
Transitional payment (JST) and continue your course. You can claim JST and a
maintenance grant at the same time. However you will no longer qualify for
Rent Supplement. It is important to remember that your entitlement to JST will
end when your youngest child reaches the age of 14. If you have not finished
your course when your youngest child reaches the age of 14 you will have to
either transfer to the Back to Education Allowance to complete your course or
opt to remain in receipt of your student grant.
