##  Before you borrow

If you are borrowing money, check to make sure that you can afford to pay back
the loan. Make sure that any money you have left after you pay for essential
living costs is enough to cover the repayments. If you can save enough money
to buy what you need, or to pay for part of the cost, it will be cheaper than
getting a loan to buy it.

**Get a loan to suit your needs**

There are many different types of loans or credit. Each type of credit is
suitable for a different purpose. Some are more suited to short-term borrowing
and others are more suited to borrowing for longer.

**Shop around for the best value**

When looking for a loan, it is worth shopping around for the best value. To
compare charges, interest on loans must be shown as the **Annual Percentage
Rate (APR)** . The APR shows what percentage of the amount you borrow will be
charged in addition to paying back the amount you borrowed.

It is important to compare like with like. Loans can be paid back over
different terms or lengths of time. You may think that you are getting a good
deal on a loan with a low APR but if you are paying more instalments over a
longer period of time you may find that it will cost you more.

If you are comparing loans that are for different lengths of time, you should
instead compare the cost of credit.

The **cost of credit** looks at the total cost of the loan. It is the
difference between the amount you borrow and the total you repay.

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has a [ loan
comparison tool ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money-tools/loan-comparison/)
that shows you the APR, monthly repayments and overall cost of credit for
personal loans that are currently available.

**Make sure you are dealing with an authorised lender**

The Central Bank authorises banks, building societies credit unions and
moneylenders. You should only borrow from an authorised lender. This protects
you and your money from predatory lenders or bogus websites. The Central Bank
has an [ explainer on why it is important to deal with an authorised company
and how to check if a company is authorised
](https://www.centralbank.ie/consumer-hub/explainers/why-is-it-important-to-
deal-with-an-authorised-financial-service-provider) .
