##  Duty of school staff to report child abuse

The [ Child Protection Procedures for Primary and Post-Primary Schools
(revised 2023)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/268613/39868a39-1de4-4890-97a0-2fa388a8a2a9.pdf#page=null)
apply to all school staff. The school board is responsible for the Child
Safeguarding Statement.

If a child tells a teacher or other member of school staff that a parent or
carer or any other person is harming or at risk of harming them, the person
who receives the information should listen carefully and supportively. This
also applies if a parent or carer or any other person discloses that they have
harmed or are at risk of harming a child.

School staff can access the support and advice of the school’s Designated
Liaison Person (DLP).

**What is the Designated Liaison Person?**

The Designated Liaison Person is a resource to any staff member or volunteer
who has a child protection or welfare concern. The Designated Liaison Person
should be well-informed about child protection. They will help any person in
their organisation who is considering making a report to Tusla (the Child and
Family Agency) and will liaise with outside agencies.

Tusla also provides [ A Guide for the Reporting of Child Protection and
Welfare Concerns
](http://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/4214-TUSLA_Guide_to_Reporters_Guide_A4_v3.pdf)
.

**Registered teachers must report child protection concerns**

Registered teachers are _mandated persons_ under the Children First Act 2015.
A _mandated person_ is a person who has ongoing contact with children and
families and because of their qualifications, training and experience is in a
key position to protect children from harm. This means that among their
responsibilities they must report child protection concerns over a defined
threshold to Tusla.

**Protection for those reporting child abuse**

No person will be penalised for making a report of child abuse in good faith
to Tusla or the Gardaí, under [ Section 4
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1998/act/49/section/4/enacted/en/html#sec4)
of the [ Protection for Persons Reporting Child Abuse Act, 1998
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0049/index.html) . If you
have been penalised, you can make a complaint under the 1998 Act.

**Boarding schools and child protection**

Boarding school management may appoint a single Designated Liaison Person
(DLP) for the school and for the boarding facility. Alternatively, it may
appoint a separate DLP for each.

Where there are separate DLPs, data protection arrangements must be in place
to ensure communication between the DLPs. If a concern relates to the school,
it should be reported to the school DLP. If a concern relates to the boarding
facility, it should be reported to the boarding facility DLP.

Boarders and parents should have an accessible way to raise concerns about
child protection and safeguarding.

Staff and management of boarding schools must:

  * Comply with the [ Child Protection Procedures for Primary and Post-Primary Schools (revised 2023) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/268613/39868a39-1de4-4890-97a0-2fa388a8a2a9.pdf#page=null)
  * Comply with the [ Children First: National Guidance for the Protection and Welfare of Children 2017 (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/25844/b90aafa55804462f84d05f87f0ca2bf6.pdf#page=null) . 
  * Implement procedures set out in the [ Child Protection and Safeguarding Procedures for Boarding Facilities associated with Recognised Schools 2023 (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/251765/a12ebf27-df94-418b-9124-271d358ccd7f.pdf) . 

**The school management's role in child protection**

School managers in primary and post-primary schools should:

  * Implement an effective child protection programme 
  * Monitor the effectiveness of the programme 
  * Manage any risk identified to a child using the service 
  * Implement agreed reporting procedures 
  * Plan and implement appropriate staff development and training programmes 

**Board of Management's role in child protection**

The Board of Management must:

  * Ensure, as far as practicable, that children are safe from harm while using the school’s services (while attending the school or while participating in school activities) 
  * Carry out an assessment of any potential for harm to children while they are attending the school or while they are participating in school activities (this is known as a risk assessment) 
  * Ensure that a Designated Liaison Person is appointed 
  * Prepare and display a written Child Safeguarding Statement as required by the Act 
  * Appoint a relevant person as the first point of contact for the school’s Child Safeguarding Statement 
  * Provide a copy of its Child Safeguarding Statement to members of school personnel and, where requested to parents, members of the public and to Tusla 

You can find further information and forms on [ child protection procedures in
schools ](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/12bee3-child-protection-procedures-
in-schools/) .
