###  Higher education programmes

Non-EEA nationals can enrol in an eligible course at level 6 or above on the [
National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ) ](http://www.qqi.ie/Pages/National-
Framework-of-Qualifications-%28NFQ%29.aspx) . Eligible courses are listed on
the [ Interim List of Eligible Programmes (ILEP)
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-my-
study-options/a-third-level-course-or-a-language-course/) . The maximum time
they can study in Ireland at this level is 7 years. There are exceptions to
this limit for students doing a PhD or a course such as medicine and for
students in special circumstances such as illness.

Students must have a certain standard of English. They must also prove that
they are progressing in the course, for example, passing exams. The [ ISD
website ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-
my-study-options/) has more information on the requirements, including
immigration rules for students on higher education programmes, and the
requirement to have [ medical insurance
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-my-
study-options/a-fee-paying-private-primary-or-secondary-school/private-
medical-insurance/) .

**Third Level Graduate Scheme:** When they graduate, students may get an
extension of their permission to remain in Ireland under the [ Third Level
Graduate Scheme ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/third-level-graduate-programme/) . The scheme
allows them to find employment and apply for a [ General Employment Permit
](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/work-permits/) or [
Critical Skills Employment Permit ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/green-card-permits/) .

Graduates with a level 8 qualification may get a 12-month extension to their
residence permission up to a maximum of 7 years of student permission overall
(that is, total time spent on [ Stamps 2 and 1G
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-
permission/information-on-registering/immigration-permission-stamps/) ).
Graduates with qualifications at level 9 or above may get a 24-month extension
(2 blocks of 12-months) to their permission up to a maximum of 8 years of
student permission overall.
