###  What is the procedure if I am arrested for drink driving?

If you are arrested at the roadside for drink driving, the Garda is obliged to
inform you in ordinary understandable language that you are being arrested for
the offence of drink driving. You will be brought to a local Garda Station
where you will be informed of your rights by a member in charge of the
station. These rights include [ consulting with a solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) . However failure to contact your
solicitor will not excuse you from complying with the Gardaâ€™s request for a
sample of blood, urine or a breath specimen.

If you provide a sample of blood or urine the sample will be divided into two
containers in your presence and sealed. You will then be offered a sample of
your choice and the remaining sample will be sent to the [ Medical Bureau of
Road Safety ](http://www.dttas.ie/roads/agencies/english/medical-bureau-road-
safety) for analysis. The results of the test will be posted to both yourself
and to the Garda concerned. You may have your own sample independently
analysed if you wish.

Similarly, if you provide a sample of your breath the intoxilyser machine will
give two immediate print outs of the level of alcohol in your breath. You will
be offered a choice of either print out to retain for yourself and the other
can be used by the Garda in court as proof that you were above the legal
limit.

If the alcohol level is shown to be over the legal amount then the Garda will
either issue a fixed penalty notice or summons you to appear in the District
Court to answer the charge of drink driving. Of course, if you are below the
legal limit then that is the end of the matter.
