###  In court

Any jury members that have been summonsed and are not excused must attend
court on the first day of jury service. The name of every juror is called out
and you must answer to show you are in attendance.

In order to select a panel of 12 jurors for a particular case, names are drawn
out of a ballot box. If your name is called, you go to the jury box where you
will be given an opportunity to state if you:

  * Are ineligible for jury service 
  * Disqualified from jury service 
  * Know the accused person, a witness or anyone taking part in the trial 
  * Are connected with the case in any way 

The [ Courts and Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2013/en/act/pub/0032/sec0023.html#sec23)
amended the [ Juries Act 1976
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1976/en/act/pub/0004/index.html) so that the
jury can consist of up to 15 members, if the case is expected to last more
than 2 months.

Even though you are called for jury service, you may not actually serve on a
jury. Usually more people are called for jury service than are needed. You
must return to court each day, whether or not you are sworn onto a jury panel,
unless the court tells you to do otherwise.

Either side in the case can challenge you as a juror. This happens when either
side objects to a proposed juror for a specific case. Each side can challenge
7 potential jurors without giving any reason and can challenge any number of
jurors if they can 'show cause'.

If you are challenged without a reason being given, you must leave the jury
box. However, you may be called to serve on another jury in a different
courtroom later. If you are challenged with a reason, the judge decides
whether or not you will serve.

The members of the jury who have been selected will individually swear an
oath, or affirm that they will properly try the issue and give a true verdict
according to the evidence.

When the jury is sworn in and before the case starts, it will select a foreman
from its members. The foreman acts as an informal chairperson and spokesperson
of the jury.
