###  Training schemes

16,525 additional places in various programmes which will be funded through
savings of €61.4 million.

**Community Employment Scheme** : 400 additional places on Community
Employment schemes at a gross cost of €6.6 million.

**Training Initiatives Strategy** : 12,015 additional short training course
places at a total gross cost of €37.3 million. These are typically 10-week
courses for the development of occupation- specific skills courses with
accreditation at either Levels 4, 5 and 6 on the National Framework of
Qualifications or with recognised industry accreditation bodies.

**Training Initiatives Strategy** : 1,833 additional longer training course
places at a total gross cost of €11m.These are typically 20- week courses for
the development of occupation- specific skills courses with accreditation at
either Levels 4, 5 and 6 on the National Framework of Qualifications or with
recognised industry accreditation bodies.

**Work experience scheme** : 2,000 places on a new 6-month work experience
scheme will be provided on a cost neutral basis where the State’s payment will
be equivalent to social welfare jobseeker’s payments weekly rates. The scheme
is for individuals who are unemployed and it will include the placement of
graduates. The details of this scheme will be finalised between the Department
of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, and the Department of Social and Family
Affairs with a view to early implementation.

**Pilot training programme for workers on short time** : 277 places on this
programme will provide training and income support to workers considered to be
in vulnerable employment. Under this pilot programme workers who have been put
on a 3-day week and who are receiving social welfare payments for the days
they are not working, will receive 2 days’ training a week for a period of 52
weeks. The cost of the training element of this scheme is approximately €1
million. The details of this scheme will be finalised between the Department
of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, and the Department of Social and Family
Affairs (DSFA) with a view to early implementation.
