##  Introduction

There are a number of social welfare payments for people who are sick or who
have a disability. Payments are made either by the Department of Social
Protection or the Health Service Executive (HSE). To qualify for a social
welfare payment because you are sick or have a disability you must be
certified as sick or disabled by a doctor.

You can qualify for certain payments if you are sick for just a short time.
For other payments you need to show that you have an illness or disability
that will last longer than one year. Some social welfare disability payments
are based on your [ PRSI contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) . If you do not have
enough PRSI contributions you may qualify for a similar social assistance
payment, however, you must be [ habitually resident ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) and pass a [ means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) .

Illness Benefit is intended for those with a short-term illness. Invalidity
Pension is a long-term payment. [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/) and [ Invalidity Pension
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) are both
social insurance payments based on your PRSI contributions. [ COVID-19
enhanced Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/covid19-enhanced-illness-benefit/) is paid if a worker is told to
self-isolate, restrict their movements or is diagnosed with COVID-19.

[ Partial Capacity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/partial-capacity-benefit/) is a scheme which allows you to return to
work (if you have reduced capacity to work) and continue to receive a payment
from the Department of Social Protection. To qualify for Partial Capacity
Benefit you need to be in receipt of either Illness Benefit (for a minimum of
6 months) or Invalidity Pension.

[ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/) is a long-term social assistance payment for those aged 16-65 with
a disability expected to last at least one year. [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/) is also a long-term
social assistance payment. If you are blind or have low vision and you are
getting Blind Pension or Disability Allowance you may also qualify for [ Blind
Welfare Allowance ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-
with-disabilities/blind-welfare-allowance/) .

The [ Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-
and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/) applies to work related
injuries and diseases. If you are injured at work (or traveling directly to or
from it) or have contracted a disease due to the type of work you do you may
qualify for benefits under this scheme.

If you are sick and do not qualify for any payment you may be eligible for [
Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) .

Generally, social welfare payments are made up of a personal payment for
yourself and extra amounts for your dependent spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant and your dependent children.
