##  How much can I borrow?

You can borrow up to 90% of the market value of the property you are building
or buying.

The maximum market value is different depending on where your home is located.
The maximum market values increased on 1 March 2023 and are now:

  * €360,000 in Dublin, Kildare, Wicklow 
  * €330,000 in Cork, Galway, Louth, Meath 
  * €300,000 in Clare, Kilkenny, Limerick, Waterford, Westmeath, Wexford 
  * €275,000 in Carlow, Cavan, Donegal, Kerry, Laois, Leitrim, Longford, Mayo, Monaghan, Offaly, Roscommon, Sligo, Tipperary 

If you got approval in principle for a loan under the previous limits, but
haven’t bought your home yet, the local authority can reassess your approval
amount under the increased limits that came in on 1 March 2023. Write to the
local authority to ask them to do this reassessment. You don’t need to reapply
for the loan.

You need to show that you can afford your monthly mortgage repayments, which
must be less than one-third of your household income. You can use the [ Home
Loan Calculator ](https://localauthorityhomeloan.ie/calculator/) on the Local
Authority Home Loan website to get an estimate of how much you can borrow and
what your repayments will be.

You can use the Local Authority Home Loan to [ buy your local authority home
under a Tenant Purchase Scheme ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/buying-or-inheriting-a-local-authority-home/) or to buy a home under
the [ Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/local-authority-affordable-purchase-scheme/) .
There are specific conditions if you are getting the loan to buy a home under
one of these schemes. For example, the purchase price of your home under these
schemes is considered when checking if you qualify for the loan, rather than
the market price. Your local authority can help you with specific information
about this. You cannot get a Local Authority Home Loan to purchase a home
under the [ First Home Scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-
home/first-home-scheme/) .
