##  Can I get a state pension?

You can get a state pension in Ireland if you meet certain conditions. If
possible, you should apply for an Irish state pension, either [ Contributory
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) or
[ Non-Contributory ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-
pension-non-contributory/) , at least 3 months before reaching pensionable age
(66 years).

**State Pension (Contributory)**

You can get the [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-
retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) if you are aged 66 or over and you
have paid enough [ Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) contributions
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/voluntary-prsi-contributions/) . It is not means-tested and you may have
other income such as a personal or occupational pension and still get a
contributory pension. Like all other income, this pension is taxed, however
you are unlikely to pay tax if it is your only source of income.

If you have paid social insurance contributions in more than one country, you
should apply **6 months** before you reach 66.

You can apply for this pension while you are still abroad.

**State Pension (Non-Contributory)**

You can get the [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-
and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/) if you are aged 66 and
over and you do not qualify for a State Pension (Contributory), **or** you
only qualify for a reduced rate contributory pension based on your social
insurance record. You must satisfy a [ means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) and
be [ habitually resident ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-
welfare/habitual-residence-condition/) in Ireland to qualify.

You must be living in Ireland to apply for this pension.

**Combining your social insurance contributions from abroad**

If you have worked in more than one [ EU or EEA country ](/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-from-eu-to-work/) , or in a
country with which Ireland has a [ Bilateral Social Security Agreement
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/dc7910-guidelines-on-application-of-
bilateral-agreements/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Bilateral-
Social-Security-Agreements-with-Other-Countries.aspx) , such as the UK,
Australia, Canada or the United States, then your social insurance
contributions can be combined with Irish insurance to see if you qualify for a
pension from each country.

You can find out more about [ combining social insurance contributions from
abroad ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) . If you are
getting a pension under EU Regulations or a Bilateral Agreement, you may also
be eligible for the Household Benefits Package.

**Increase in payment for adult and child dependents**

If youâ€™re getting a State pension, you may get an increase for a dependant
adult such as a spouse, civil partner or cohabitant. This is known as an [
Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-
social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) . You may also be entitled to
claim for any [ child dependants ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/) .

**How to apply**

You need to complete the application form and send it to the relevant address
with documentary evidence as required.

You can get an application form from your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e21eee-state-pension-non-
contributory/) , post office or Citizens Information Centre.

You can also print the relevant application form below:

  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) application form (pdf) ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/pdf/spnc1.pdf)
  * [ State Pension (Contributory) application form (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/26952/c008566575c14e958b0597dfd5b3be91.pdf)

To apply for a pension or any other form of State benefit in Ireland, you need
a [ Personal Public Service number (PPS number) ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-
and-families/) . This number is a unique personal identification number that
is essential for applying for state benefits and services in Ireland.

Read more information about [ getting a pension in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/social_welfare_payments/older_and_retired_people/)
.
