##  What health services am I entitled to?

Both private and public health services are available in Ireland.

**Public health services**

Public health services are provided by the [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) . You can [ access
public health services ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-
health/accessing-healthcare-on-your-return-to-ireland/) either free of charge
or at a reduced cost if you are _ordinarily resident_ in Ireland. [ Ordinarily
resident ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-
services#la6e34) means you have been living in Ireland for at least a year or
you intend to live here for at least one year.

**Medical cards and GP visit cards**

Depending on your income, age and situation you may be eligible for a medical
card which entitles you to access certain public health services at no cost.
If you are ordinarily resident in Ireland and getting a pension from an EU or
EEA country or Switzerland, you may qualify for a medical card under EU rules.
If you are getting a social security pension from the UK, you may be entitled
to a medical card if you are ordinarily resident in Ireland.

If you are not eligible for a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-
gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) , you may qualify for a [ GP visit card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) . With a GP
visit card, you can visit your doctor free of charge. Your eligibility depends
on your age, income and situation.

**Private health services**

Private health services are provided by individual health professionals or
healthcare companies. You usually pay the full cost of private health services
unless you have [ private health insurance ](/en/health/health-system/private-
health-insurance/) . Use the Health Insurance Authorityâ€™s [ Health Insurance
Comparison tool ](https://www.hia.ie/health-insurance-comparison) to compare
private health insurance in Ireland.

Read about [ returning to Ireland and buying private health insurance
](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-and-
buying-private-health-insurance/) .
