##  Public transport in Ireland

[ Public transport
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel_and_recreation/public_transport/)
includes bus, rail, the Luas tram system, taxis, hackneys, and limousines.

Transport for Ireland (TFI) have a useful [ door-to-door journey planner
](https://www.transportforireland.ie/plan-a-journey/) . It includes service
information, directions, and time estimates for taking a journey on public
transport across Ireland.

The public transport services available to you will depend on where you are in
Ireland.

**Bus services**

[ Dublin Bus ](https://www.dublinbus.ie/) provides bus services in Dublin and
the surrounding areas.

These services include:

  * Regular city bus services 
  * The Airlink (a daily service connecting Dublin Airport to several city centre locations) 
  * The Nitelink (a late-night bus service that runs from Dublin city centre to the suburbs on Friday and Saturday nights) 

Dublin Bus offer [ 24-hour services ](https://www.dublinbus.ie/24-hour-
timetables) which are in operation seven days a week across [ ten routes
](https://www.transportforireland.ie/getting-around/by-bus/night-services-
dublin/#:~:text=travel%20in%20Dublin.-,Night%20Services,which%20are%20in%20operation%20seven%20days%20a%20week%20across%20ten%20routes.,-15%20From%20Clongriffin)
.

[ Bus Éireann ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/bus-services-in-ireland#l73394) provide Expressway
(intercity), commuter, local, and school bus services throughout Ireland. They
also operate coach services to Britain and Europe from ports at Dublin and
Rosslare Europort in association with Eurolines.

[ Local Link ](https://www.transportforireland.ie/support/your-tfi-local-link-
office/) provides public bus services in rural areas of Ireland. There are 15
Local Link offices.

**Train services**

The [ DART (Dublin Area Rapid Transit) ](https://www.irishrail.ie/about-
us/iarnrod-eireann-services/dart-commuter) runs along the east coast from
Malahide in County Dublin to Greystones in County Wicklow.

Iarnród Éireann (also known as Irish Rail) is the operator of the national
railway network of Ireland. You can visit the [ Iarnród Éireann website
](https://www.irishrail.ie/?gclid=EAIaIQobChMI8rzh6-6A6AIVh6ztCh3UvA63EAAYASAAEgIPUfD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds)
for information on ticketing and timetables.

It provides the [ following rail services between main towns and cities
](https://www.irishrail.ie/train-timetables/intercity-live-map) :

  * [ Commuter services ](https://www.irishrail.ie/about-us/iarnrod-eireann-services/dart-commuter) in the Dublin area between Dundalk, Dunboyne, Longford, Portlaoise and Gorey 
  * [ InterCity services ](https://www.irishrail.ie/about-us/iarnrod-eireann-services/intercity) depart from Heuston and Connolly Stations in Dublin and run to Belfast, Sligo, Ballina, Westport, Galway, Limerick, Ennis, Tralee, Cork, Waterford and Rosslare Europort 
  * The [ Enterprise service ](https://www.irishrail.ie/offer/take-the-enterprise-service-to-belfast) operates between Belfast and Dublin and is jointly run by Iarnród Éireann and Northern Ireland Rail 

**Trams**

The Luas is a light rail network that connects the city centre with suburban
areas in Dublin. It has 2 tramlines, the green line and the red line. Find
information on Luas tickets, routes and timetables on [ luas.ie
](https://www.luas.ie/) .

**TaxSaver Commuter Ticket**

If you will be commuting to work, you can use the [ TaxSaver Commuter Ticket
Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/public-
transport/public-transport-commuter-tickets-and-tax/) to buy cheaper travel
tickets through your employer.

**Leap card**

Use a [ Leap card ](https://www.leapcard.ie/Home/index.html) to pay a reduced
fare on public transport in certain counties in Ireland. It is a pre-paid
travel card for use on bus, train, DART and Luas services in:

  * Athlone 
  * Cork 
  * Dublin 
  * Galway 
  * Kilkenny 
  * Limerick 
  * Sligo 
  * Waterford 
  * Wexford 

**Free Travel Scheme**

The [ Free Travel Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) allows you to travel for
free on public transport and some private bus and ferry services. Everyone
aged 66 and over, living permanently in Ireland, can get the Free Travel
Scheme. You may also qualify if you are under 66 and you have disability or
you are a carer.

If you are 66 or over and have Free Travel you can also travel free of charge
on bus and rail services in Northern Ireland using a [ Senior Smartpass card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel#l2ad8a) .
