##  Ending a civil partnership

When a civil partnership breaks down, the civil partners may choose to
informally separate and live apart. However, most couples will eventually want
to regulate matters between them.

If a married couple or civil partners can agree the terms on which they will
live separately, they may enter into a [ separation agreement ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/) . The
agreement is a legally binding contract setting out each party's rights and
obligations to the other. The terms of the agreement are usually reached
either through mediation or negotiation through solicitors.

The courts are also able to dissolve civil partnerships in a similar way to
the granting of divorce. To grant a [ decree of dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/) , civil
partners must have been living apart* for 2 out of 3 years. However, the rules
governing the [ dissolution of civil partnerships ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/) are different.

Orders such as [ protection orders ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-
in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders/) ,
[ maintenance orders ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/) and [ pension adjustment orders
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)
can be made during court proceedings for the dissolution of civil partnerships
in the same way as they can in judicial separation and divorce proceedings.

Unlike divorce proceedings, the civil partnersâ€™ legal advisers do not have to
discuss the possibility of reconciliation, mediation or other alternatives to
dissolution. The court may, however, adjourn proceedings to facilitate these
alternatives.

In specific circumstances, the courts are able to grant a [ decree of nullity
of civil partnership ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-
partnerships/nullity-of-civil-partnership/) in broadly the same way as decrees
of nullity of marriage are granted.
