####  Supports for investment in business

**Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)** : it has been agreed with the
Department of Justice to propose the inclusion of REITs as an investment
option in the Immigrant Investor Programme.

**Research and Development Tax Credit** : the amount of expenditure eligible
for the R&D Tax Credit on a full volume basis (without reference to the 2003
base year) is being increased from €200,000 to €300,000. The limit on the
amount of R&D expenditure that can be outsourced will increase from10% to 15%.

**Capital Gains Tax** : A new relief from Capital Gains Tax is being
introduced to encourage entrepreneurs who reinvest the proceeds from the
disposal of assets, on which CGT has previously been paid, into a new
investment in productive trading activities. The measure will apply where
someone who has already paid CGT on the disposal of assets invests in a new
business in the period 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2018 and subsequently
disposes of this investment no earlier than three years after the date of
investment. The relief will be a tax credit equal to (i) the lower of the CGT
paid on the previous asset disposal or (ii) 50% of the CGT due on any gain
from the future disposal of the new investment. EU state-aid approval is
required for this measure.

**Employment and Investment Incentive** : The initial 30% relief available for
investments under the Employment and Investment Incentive (EII) is being
removed from the high earners restriction for a period of 3 years. This
restriction limits the amount of tax reliefs that can be claimed by high
income individuals. The EII provides that a maximum of €150,000 can be
invested by an individual per annum. Therefore, by lifting the restriction on
the initial 30% relief, these investors should be encouraged to invest more
funds in the EII and improve the availability of funds to SMEs.
