###  Payments made abroad in limited situations

[ Injury Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/)
can be paid abroad if you are getting approved medical treatment.

[ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-
benefit/) can be paid for a maximum of 4 weeks while you are on holiday in a
country covered by EU Regulations and 3 weeks in other countries. You can
continue to get Illness Benefit if you go to live in another country covered
by EU Regulations. However, you must still meet all the qualifying criteria
for Illness Benefit which includes submitting medical certificates to the DSP.
If you go to live in another country covered by EU Regulations and become ill
you may apply for Illness Benefit from Ireland if you paid your last insurance
contribution in Ireland or you were getting Jobseeker’s Benefit in Ireland
before you went abroad. Illness Benefit is not paid in countries not covered
by EU Regulations. However, if you go to a country not covered by EU
regulations to get approved treatment your payment may resume when you return.

[ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) can be paid if
you accompany the person you are caring for abroad to get medical treatment.
You can also go abroad on a respite break for a maximum of 3 weeks. Carer's
Benefit may be paid if you are providing full-time care and attention to
another person in the EU, provided you meet the qualifying conditions for
Carer's Benefit.

[ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-
benefit/) or [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/adoptive-benefit/) can continue to be paid to citizens of the [
EU/EEA, Switzerland ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-
institutions/overview-of-eu-institutions/) or the UK for any period of their
maternity or adoptive leave spent in another EU/EEA country, Switzerland or
the UK.

Citizens of countries other than the EU/EEA , Switzerland or the UK can travel
anywhere abroad and get Maternity Benefit or Adoptive Benefit for a maximum of
6 weeks.

To get Maternity Benefit or Adoptive Benefit paid while abroad, you must
notify the Department in advance of travel.

[ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-
benefit/) can be paid abroad to both EU and non-EU citizens for a maximum of 2
weeks. You must notify the Department in advance of travel.

If you are working in another [ EEA member state
](http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Pages/eu-eea-countries) you may qualify for
benefit, if you continue to be insured under the Irish Social Welfare Acts.

[ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
benefit/) (JB) and [ Jobseeker’s Benefit (Self-Employed) ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/) may be
transferred to another EEA member state for up to 13 weeks (78 days), if you
are looking for work there. You must be getting Jobseeker's Benefit for 4
weeks before you can transfer it to another EEA member state (this requirement
can be waived in some instances). From 1 May 2010 [ new EU Regulations came
into effect ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e95f88-operational-guidelines-
jobseekers-benefit/#eu-regulations) which mean that if you apply to transfer
your Jobseeker's Benefit, it will be paid directly to you. If an Increase for
a Qualified Adult (IQA) or Increases for Qualified Children (IQC) are being
paid you continue to be paid these in the normal way (whether your dependents
travel abroad with you or not).

You are still required to register with the employment services of the country
where you have gone to look for work within a week. If you are leaving Ireland
to move to Northern Ireland or Britain, your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office will issue you with the Form U2 (formerly Form E303) which you
take to the UK social services. If you are moving to another EU country, the
Department of Social Protection will send the U2 form to your new address in
that EU country. You may transfer your JB payment more than once while you are
unemployed provided you do not exceed the maximum period of 13 weeks.

If you are claiming JB, you can claim increases for your qualified adult and
children who are living in another EEA member state.

Jobseeker's payments can also be paid on your return from representing Ireland
in an amateur capacity at international sporting event. You must get written
confirmation of the sport and time involved from the governing sporting body.

You should let the Department know that you are taking a holiday at least 2
weeks before you go away. You can do this using [ MyWelfare
](https://www.mywelfare.ie/) if you have a verified account or fill in a
holiday entitlement form at [ your local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/service/40cf48-find-your-local-intreo-
office/) .
