##  Introduction

This page is about the [ Youth Employment Support Scheme (YESS),
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Youth-Employment-Support-scheme-YESS.aspx)
which closed in July 2021. It was replaced by the [ Work Placement Experience
Programme (WPEP) ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-
support-schemes/work-placement-experience-programme/) .

**This page can be used for reference purposes for information on the
operation of the YESS up until it closed on 12 July 2021.**

The [ Youth Employment Support Scheme (YESS)
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Youth-Employment-Support-scheme-YESS.aspx)
supported long-term unemployed young people back into the workplace. It
started on 1 October 2018 and ended in July 2021.

YESS aimed to give you the opportunity to learn basic work and social skills
in a supportive environment, while on a work placement in a host organisation.
You must have been aged 18–24, unemployed and getting a qualifying social
welfare payment for at least 12 months – see 'Rules' below. If you were
unemployed for less than 12 months, you must have faced a significant barrier
to work to qualify.

Participation was voluntary. There was no financial penalties if you did not
want to participate in the scheme or if you dropped out.

The scheme was open to host organisations in the private, community and
voluntary sectors only. Public service bodies, including schools and colleges,
could not host YESS placements.

YESS was a scheme under the [ Irish Youth Guarantee
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Youth-Guarantee-Ireland.aspx) . A previous
placement scheme, [ First Steps ](https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/youth-
development-internship.aspx) , which was similar to YESS, finished on 30 March
2018. **YESS is no longer available and was replaced by the** [ **Work
Placement Experience Programme (WPEP)**
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/95fe1-work-placement-experience-programme/)
**.**
