##  Housing policy

The Government’s policy on homelessness is based on a housing-led approach. It
aims to secure long-term housing for people who are homeless, with additional
social supports if necessary. This policy is covered in a number of different
plans and policies.

**Housing for All**

In 2021, the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage published [
Housing for All - a New Housing Plan for Ireland
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ef5ec-housing-for-all-a-new-housing-plan-
for-ireland/#view-the-plan) . This plan sets out the Government’s housing plan
for Ireland to 2030. One of the plans aims is to end homelessness by 2030. The
document outlines 4 different pathways to achieving this:

  * Supporting homeownership and increasing affordability 
  * Ending homelessness, increasing social housing delivery and supporting inclusion 
  * Increasing new housing supply 
  * Addressing vacancy and efficient use of existing housing stock 

**Housing First**

[ Housing First ](https://www.housingagency.ie/housing-information/housing-
first) works to secure permanent secure accommodation with extensive wrap-
around supports for people who are sleeping rough or have been in emergency
accommodation for a long time.

These wrap-around supports can include health supports to help with addiction
or mental health issues. This helps the most vulnerable homeless people to
maintain secure tenancies. The Department of Housing, Local Government and
Heritage has published its [ Housing First Implementation Plan for 2022 –
2026. ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/c49d0-housing-first-national-
implementation-plan-2022-2026/) This lists the number of people it intends to
help with this programme over the next few years.

**Youth Homelessness Strategy**

The Government launched a 3-year [ Youth Homelessness Strategy
](https://assets.gov.ie/239255/99c987df-4439-4bc2-8730-be614eae1e2e.pdf) in
November 2022. This focuses on ending homelessness for young people aged
18-24. The 3 main aims of the strategy are to:

  * Prevent young people from entering homelessness 
  * Improve the experiences of young people entering homelessness 
  * Assist young people in exiting homelessness 

**National Homelessness Action Committee**

The [ National Homelessness Action Committee
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/aad47-national-homeless-action-committee/)
is a cross-governmental and inter-agency group set up in 2021. They are
responsible for working across Government to ensure that actions in the
Housing for All plan are carried out. The committee also have a role in
addressing emerging homeless-related issues and in developing responses to
these issues.
