###  Environment

The Water Services Investment Programme gets an increased provision of €89
million (+19%).

Due to a reduction of 63% in funding, the landfill remediation programme in
2009 will require local authorities to re-profile necessary works over a
longer period with the most urgent works being prioritised.

Funding for urban regeneration in 2009 has decreased by 95%. This reflects the
completion in early 2008 of the final funding allocations for urban renewal
grants under the two Regional Operation Programmes (2000-2006). The
introduction of a new programme in 2010 will be examined in 2009 subject to
the availability of resources.

Capital funding of €71 million is being made available to fund sustainable
energy and energy research programmes. This allows for the expansion of some
programmes.

Funding for the Home Energy Saving scheme run by Sustainable Energy Ireland
(SEI), and piloted since 2008, is being increased from €5 million in 2008 to
€20 million in 2009.

Funding of €5 million will also be provided for the Warmer Homes Scheme.

The funding provision for the Greener Homes Scheme run by SEI has been scaled
back from €27 million to €12 million.

Capital expenditure of €10 million is provided for additional carbon reduction
measures to target climate change initiatives in the transport sector.

The tax incentive introduced in Budget and Finance Act 2008, which provides
for capital allowances of 100% of expenditure incurred by companies in the
year the equipment is purchased, is being extended from 3 categories to 7
categories. The new categories to be included in this scheme are:

  * Data server related systems and large energy saving office equipment associated with Information & Communications Technology 
  * Efficient heating/electricity provision equipment and control systems 
  * Efficient electrical and control equipment associated with process & heating ventilation and air-conditioning systems 
  * Alternative fuel vehicles 

The salmon conservation scheme is winding down in 2009, giving a reduction of
€11.3 million on current spending, compared with 2008. There is also a
reduction of €0.4 million on the Fisheries Boards funding.

Capital funding of €45 million is being provided for communications
infrastructure. This will facilitate rollout of the National Broadband Scheme
to ensure broadband availability within the timeframe 2009 to 2011 in rural
areas not currently served by broadband.
