##  Children’s Disability Network Teams

Children with a range of significant difficulties may be referred to a [
Children’s Disability Network Team ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability-
support-and-services/childrens-disability-services/childrens-disability-
services.html) . This is a team of professionals with expertise in disability
who work closely together. Other specialists may also be available to the team
if needed.

Children’s Disability Network Teams provide services to children with complex
needs aged from birth to 18 years. (Previously, some of these services were
known as Early Intervention Services and School Age Services.)

The team will assess and identify your child’s needs and, together with you,
develop a plan of action for providing services. This plan may include
individual and group therapy and supports for families.

Children’s Disability Network Teams are led by the HSE or by disability
organisations such as [ Enable Ireland ](https://www.enableireland.ie/) , [ St
Michael’s House ](https://www.smh.ie/) or the [ Brothers of Charity
](https://www.brothersofcharity.ie/) . The HSE has published information on
the [ Children’s Disability Network Teams (pdf)
](https://www.enableireland.ie/sites/default/files/publication/Childrens%20Disability%20Network%20Teams%20Leaflet.pdf)
and how they work.

A Children’s Disability Network Team may include:

  * Psychologists 
  * Nurses 
  * Occupational therapists 
  * Paediatricians (doctors specialising in the medical care of children) 
  * Physiotherapists 
  * Social workers 
  * Speech and language therapists 
  * Other professionals 

Information about [ Children’s Disability Network Teams is available in
different languages ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability-support-and-
services/childrens-disability-services/translated-children-s-disability-
network-information.html) .

Your child may be referred to a Children’s Disability Network Team through
your paediatrician, GP, public health nurse or school.

You can also make a referral directly yourself to the [ Children’s Disability
Network Team in your area ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability-support-
and-services/childrens-disability-services/find-a-childrens-disability-
service.html) by filling in:

  * The Children’s Services Referral Form 
  * An Additional Information Form for your child’s age group. This gives you an opportunity to describe your child’s development and what your concerns are. 

You can get the [ Children Services Referral Form and the Additional
Information Form on the HSE website ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability-
support-and-services/childrens-disability-services/get-a-referral-for-
childrens-disability-services.html) .

Send the forms to the [ Children's Disability Network Team for your area
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability-support-and-services/childrens-
disability-services/find-a-childrens-disability-service.html) .

Health professionals will review the information you provide in the forms to
help decide the best service for your child. Unfortunately, there is often a
waiting list for these services. While you wait, you can [ contact
organisations who will provide you with information, advice and support
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability-support-and-services/if-you-have-
just-found-out-your-child-has-a-disability/useful-childhood-disability-
websites.html) .
