##  Adult education and community education courses

You don't need formal qualifications to take part in many of the full-time and
part-time courses in the adult education and community education sectors.

**Adult education** courses can include further and third-level education or
continuing education and training. Courses are available both part-time and
full-time.

**Community education** is adult education and learning, generally outside the
formal education sector. It promotes personalised learning and flexibility
within learning groups.

The [ Education and Training Boards (ETBs) ](http://www.etbi.ie/) , [ SOLAS
](http://www.solas.ie/) and other agencies fund continuing education and
training programmes. ETBs organise second-level, adult, community and second
chance education. You can contact your local ETB for more details. They also
operate the [ Vocational Training and Opportunities Scheme (VTOS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/returning-to-
education/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) which provides a range of
education and training courses if you are unemployed.

[ Further Education and Training (FET) courses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/training-courses/) help you develop or upgrade your skills in the
commercial and industrial sectors if you are unemployed or have been made
redundant. You can search online for training courses.

The Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI) is a project-based training and
work experience programme carried out in the local community. It is run by
local community groups. The programme is for unemployed people finding it
difficult to get a job. It is primarily aimed at people aged between 18 and
35. You can find LTI progammes through your local ETB Training Centre or on [
fetchcourses.ie ](http://www.fetchcourses.ie/) .

[ Community Training Centres ](http://www.iacto.ie/learners/ctcs/) are
independent community-based organisations. They look after the training and
employment needs of early school leavers, mainly aged between 16 and 21. If
you are aged between 15 and 20 and have left school without any formal
qualifications, the Youthreach programme will provide you with opportunities
for basic education, personal development, vocational training and work
experience.
