##  Public, semi-private and private care options

You will be asked whether you want to be a [ public, semi-private or private
patient ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/choices-in-antenatal-care/) when you
ring to make your first appointment.

  * **Free public care**

You can get free maternity care through the Maternity and Infant Care Scheme.

Your hospital appointments will usually be with a midwife. You can also choose
to see your GP for some appointments. If your pregnancy is higher risk,
obstetricians and midwives will provide your care.

Free public care covers births in hospitals and the [ HSE Home Birth Service
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/maternity/homebirth-services.html) .

You will need to register for the [ Maternity and Infant Care Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/) .

  * **Semi-private care**

If you choose semi-private care, a consultant obstetrician will oversee your
care. A semi-private ward may be provided after the birth, if available.

Semi-private care combines public and private care. This means that part of
your care is free, but you pay for additional services. Most people use their
private health insurance to cover this fee. Check your level of cover with
your insurance provider so you know what the fees will be and what will be
covered by your private health insurance.[MF4]

You should also register for the [ Maternity and Infant Care Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/) .

  * **Private care**

Private antenatal and maternity care is available in all maternity hospitals.
With this type of pregnancy care, you'll have a consultant obstetrician. Any
extra scans or tests you need during your pregnancy will be covered. You may
also get your own private room after the birth if one is available.

If you choose private care, youâ€™ll usually need to pay a consultant's fee as
well as a hospital fee. Your private insurance will cover most of the hospital
fee, but may not cover the consultant's fee. If you have private health
insurance, check your level of cover before booking your antenatal care. You
should also register for the [ Maternity and Infant Care Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/) .
