##  What is the CE scheme?

The Community Employment (CE) programme (more commonly known as the ‘CE
Scheme’) is designed to help people who are long-term unemployed (or otherwise
disadvantaged) to get back to work by offering part-time and temporary
placements in jobs based within local communities.

If you are a participant in the CE scheme, you can take up other part-time
work during your placement. This includes self-employment, as long as it does
not interfere with your 19.5 hours, and you [ declare all your income to
Revenue ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/becoming-self-employed/#2845a6) .

After the placement, you are encouraged to look for permanent jobs elsewhere,
based on the experience and new skills you have gained while on a Community
Employment scheme.

You can find out more about CE and the experience of CE participants in the [
DSP video on Community Employment ](https://vimeo.com/523868167/845d3588b5) .

If you are a CE supervisor or a CE assistant supervisor, you can get a once-
off CE Ex-Gratia Payment after you reach retirement age. You can find out more
on [ gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/6d9c7-community-employment-ex-
gratia-payment-for-supervisors-and-assistant-supervisors/.) .

The [ Department of Social Protection (DSP)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/412714-community-employment-programme/) gives
allowances and funding to assist with the Community Employment scheme, for
example, your wages, supervisor grants, materials grants and specific skills
training grants. Community Employment sponsors are the voluntary organisations
or public bodies that manage CE schemes at a local level. Detailed information
is available in the [ Community Employment procedures manual (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/44851/45bfddab6e4a45f7a72203911432304e.pdf) .
