##  Working on a CE scheme

You must work for 19.5 hours per week (excluding breaks) for your sponsor to
be eligible for a grant towards the cost of wages. Your sponsor may agree with
DSP to arrange your work hours differently for example, 39 hours every second
week, or 19.5 hours every week, in combinations of full or half days or 2.5
days per week.

You are paid weekly by your sponsor and you have certain statutory employment
rights including [ annual leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-leave/) , [ public holidays
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-
holidays/) , [ maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) , [ paternity leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/paternity-leave/) and a [ written statement of your terms and
conditions of employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) . Tax may be
deducted from your pay, if applicable, but your CE pay is exempt from the [
Universal Social Charge ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-
charge/) .

You are entitled to a maximum of 56 hours (7 full days) of medically certified
sick leave in a 52 week period. The DSP provides the sponsor with a support
grant towards the payment of sick leave. In general, there is no payment for
uncertified sick leave. However, in certain cases the DSP officer may allow a
maximum of 2 uncertified days (8 hours) in any 12 month period. Detailed
information on sick leave is available in the [ Community Employment
Procedures Manual (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/44851/45bfddab6e4a45f7a72203911432304e.pdf) .

CE participants pay PRSI at Class A8/A9, which counts as a full Class A
contribution. If your CE payment is less than €352 a week, you do not pay any
employee contribution. If your CE payment is over €352 a week, you pay an
employee PRSI contribution. Detailed information is available in the [
Community Employment Procedures Manual (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/44851/45bfddab6e4a45f7a72203911432304e.pdf) .
