##  Social welfare payments

If you are parenting alone you may qualify for certain social welfare
payments. Since 4 June 2024, child maintenance payments are not included in
the means test for social assistance payments. However, if you are getting
maintenance that is not child maintenance, this will continue to be means-
tested.

[ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) is
payable for each child under 16 years of age, or under 18 years of age if the
child is in full-time education or has a disability. From 1 May 2024, Child
Benefit is extended to children aged 18 who are in full-time education or who
have a disability until their 19th birthday. Child Benefit is not means-
tested.

[ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) is a means-tested payment for parents who are bringing
children up without the support of a partner. It is payable to a single
parent, a widow/widower/surviving civil partner, a prisoner's spouse/civil
partner, a separated or divorced person, a person whose marriage/civil
partnership has been annulled or whose civil partnership has been dissolved.

Basic [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) is a weekly allowance paid to people who
do not have enough income to meet their needs and the needs of their families.
If you have no income, you may be entitled to the basic Supplementary Welfare
Allowance (SWA). If your weekly income is below the Supplementary Welfare
Allowance rate for your family size, a payment may be made to bring your
income up to the appropriate Supplementary Welfare Allowance rate.

[ Working Family Payment (WFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) is a weekly tax-free payment for employees
with children. It supports people who are on low pay. You must have at least
one child who normally lives with you or who you support financially. You may
be entitled to WFP in addition to your [ One-Parent Family Payment
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) or [
Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Contributory) Pension
](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-
pension/) .

You may be entitled to a [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-
persons-contrib-pension/) if either you or your deceased spouse has enough
PRSI contributions. Under the [ Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-
overview/) , a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension may be
payable if the death was due to an occupational injury or disease or an
accident while travelling directly to or from work.
