##  Rules

You can qualify for a Back to Work Enterprise Allowance (BTWEA) if you are:

  1. Setting up as self-employed in a new business that has been approved in advance in writing by a DSP Case Officer and a Local Development Company (see 'How to apply' below) 

**and**

  2. Getting Jobseeker's Benefit (JB)* or Jobseeker's Allowance (JA) continuously for at least 9 months (234 days). If you have been getting either of these payments continuously for 12 months (312 days) immediately before BTWEA, you can have a maximum of 30 days off the Live Register during this time 

(*with an underlying entitlement to Jobseeker's Allowance - see 'Jobseeker's
Benefit and underlying entitlement to JA' below)

**or**

Getting one of the qualifying payments below continuously for at least 9
months

  * [ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/) (JST) 
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) (OFP) 
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) (full rate) - having stopped caring duties 
  * [ Deserted Wife's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/) /Allowance 
  * [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) \- the new business cannot be in relation to the farm holding or the continuation of an existing business 
  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/)
  * [ Incapacity Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disablement-benefit/)
  * [ Widow's/Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)

**or**

  * Qualifying from Illness Benefit: 3 out of last 5 years in receipt of a qualifying social welfare payment 

or

  * Combination of OFP/JST/JA continuously for 9 months 

***Jobseeker's Benefit and underlying entitlement to JA**

If you are on Jobseeker's Benefit, you need to have an underlying entitlement
to Jobseeker's Allowance in order to qualify for BTWEA. Having an underlying
entitlement to Jobseeker's Allowance means that you would pass the means test
and other criteria for Jobseeker's Allowance. Signing on for [ unemployment
credits ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) following your Jobseeker's
Benefit does not count towards the qualifying period for BTWEA.

**Other ways of qualifying for BTWEA**

You may also be considered for the BTWEA if you are a [ qualified adult
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-
dependant/) of a person who is already getting the BTWEA.

You may qualify if the person who is getting the BTWEA stops their self-
employment before exhausting their entitlement due to certain circumstances.
Valid circumstances would include a long-term illness or injury which prevents
the original claimant from working, or the illness of an immediate family
member which requires them to become a full-time carer. If you are the
qualified adult of a BTWEA claimant who stops their self-employment to take up
other employment, this is not a valid circumstance to qualify you for BTWEA.

If you qualify for BTWEA in this way, you may avail of the scheme for the time
remaining on the original claim. This involves the original claimant
transferring his or her entitlements to you as their spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant. (In other words, you become self-employed and the original
claimant becomes your qualified adult on the BTWEA). If the original claimant
is entitled to credits, he or she can continue to claim them. However BTWEA
cannot be paid at the same time as another social welfare payment so if the
original claimant (now a qualified adult) decides to claim another payment you
must stop claiming BTWEA.

If you have been recently released from prison, you may qualify for BTWEA.
Time spent in prison can count towards the qualifying period for the BTWEA if
you establish an entitlement to a relevant social welfare payment before
becoming self-employed.

**Qualifying periods for BTWEA**

Periods of time spent on Community Employment, Rural Social Scheme, Gateway,
TÃºs, BTEA and VTOS schemes and [ certain Education and Training Board (ETB)
training courses ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-
courses/) are accepted as qualifying periods provided you were entitled to a
qualifying payment before starting on the study or training.

Time spent on Supplementary Welfare Allowance, the [ COVID-19 Pandemic
Unemployment Payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-
unemployment-payment/) or in direct provision for asylum seekers can count
towards the qualifying period for BTWEA, as long as you establish an
entitlement to one of the qualifying payments listed above before starting the
BTWEA.

If you have previously participated in the BTWEA scheme and used up your
entitlement, you can participate a second time after at least 5 years.

Where you have a break from an eligible payment due to Maternity or Paternity
Benefit, you can also qualify as long as you were on an eligible payment
before and after the Benefit and for the required time periods above.

Find out more about the [ qualifying periods for Back to Work Enterprise
Allowance ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/8471e4-operational-guidelines-
back-to-work-enterprise-allowance-self-employ/) .
