##  Introduction

A hire purchase (HP) agreement is a credit agreement. You hire an item (for
example, a car, laptop or television) and pay an agreed amount in monthly
payments. You do not own the item until you have made the final payment.
Personal Contract Plans (PCPs) are a type of hire purchase agreement.

**You should know:**

  * Some HP agreements have a balloon payment at the end of the agreement which is normally higher than your usual monthly payments 
  * You do not legally own the item until after the final payment is made, but you do have full use of the item throughout the payment period 
  * You cannot legally sell the item until the agreement has been paid off 
  * If you do not keep up the repayments, the item can be seized 
  * You have the right to  end the agreement  at any time 

You can take out a hire purchase agreement with a bank, building society or
finance company. [ Firms providing these services must be authorised by the
Central Bank ](https://www.centralbank.ie/news/article/central-bank-announces-
new-consumer-protections-on-the-commencement-of-consumer-
protection-\(regulation-of-retail-credit-and-credit-servicing-
firms\)-act-2022) .

Hire purchase can also be arranged through a retailer. If you take out a HP
agreement with a retailer, the store or garage is not usually providing the
loan. It is acting as an agent for a finance company and will earn commission
from the finance company for arranging the loan. This is called being a credit
intermediary and the agent must be authorised by the Competition and Consumer
Protection Commission (CCPC) to do this. You can check the [ Register of
Credit Intermediaries ](https://www.ccpc.ie/business/credit-
intermediaries/authorised-credit-intermediaries/) to see if the agent is
authorised.

Hire purchase agreements usually last between 2 and 5 years. Most HP
agreements last 3 years. You should read a hire purchase contract very
carefully before committing yourself to any agreement.

Hire purchase agreements are covered by the [ Consumer Protection Code
](https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/consumer-protection/consumer-
protection-codes-regulations) which gives you [ rights when you buy a
financial product ](/en/consumer/financial-products/your-rights-when-buying-
financial-products/) . Hire Purchase is regulated by the [ Consumer Credit Act
1995 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1995/act/24/front/revised/en/html)
.
