##  Customs checks

Customs and Excise officers carry out checks on [ imported goods (including
personal baggage) ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/customs-
regulations-for-travellers/) to prevent people from smuggling dutiable,
excisable or prohibited goods. These checks are regularly carried out on
travellers arriving from outside the EU (or from outside the EU via an EU
country). These travellers must make a Customs declaration, which is a
document with details of goods that are being imported or exported.

If you are arriving in Ireland from outside the EU via an EU country, you must
make a Customs declaration unless all your baggage was cleared by Customs
officers at your point of arrival in the EU. If you are [ entering or leaving
the European Union and carrying â‚¬10,000 or more in cash
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/travelling-with-
cash/index.aspx#:~:text=declarations%20for%20cash-,Overview,the%20amount%20declared%20is%20correct)
, you must make a special declaration to the Customs authority of the EU
country you are entering or leaving.

If all your baggage was cleared by Customs officers when you arrived in the
EU, you can proceed through the Blue Channel at your point of arrival in
Ireland. You usually use the Red Channel or the Green Channel if you are
making a customs declaration.

Travellers should go through the Red Channel if:

  * They have more than the allowances they are entitled to, or 
  * They are in doubt about whether they have more than the permitted allowances or 
  * They have prohibited or restricted goods. 

Travellers should go through the Green Channel if they have:

  * Only the allowances that they are permitted and 
  * They have no prohibited or restricted goods. 

Travellers arriving from outside the EU may be questioned and their baggage
may be examined. Travellers arriving from within the EU do not have to make a
Customs declaration and should proceed through the Blue Channel. However,
Customs officers can question these travellers if they have reason to doubt
that the person arrived from an EU country. Customs officers may also
intervene if they have reason to believe that:

  * Prohibited or restricted goods (including drugs) are being imported or exported 
  * An offence is being committed in respect of excisable products 

These procedures are in place to help protect public safety and to guard
against tax or duty fraud.
