**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > Standards and accountability

#  Standards and accountability

  * [ Freedom of information (FOI) ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/freedom-of-information/)

Outlines the responsibilities of public bodies and other designated bodies
under the Freedom of Information Act and your right to access information held
by them.

  * [ Office of the Ombudsman ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/)

The main duty of the Irish Ombudsman is to investigate complaints made by
members of the public about how they have been treated by public bodies in
Ireland.

  * [ Comptroller and Auditor General ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/comptroller-and-auditor-general/)

The Comptroller and Auditor General carries out an audit each year of the
State's accounts.

  * [ Public petitions ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/public-petitions/)

Members of the public can raise issues of general public interest or public
policy with the Houses of the Oireachtas.

  * [ Regulation of lobbying ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/regulation-of-lobbying/)

The Register of Lobbying is maintained by the Standards in Public Office
Commission. Find out who is required to register.

  * [ Rights Tribunals ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/rights-tribunals/)

Rights Tribunals are tribunals that make binding decisions about the rights of
people in Ireland.

  * [ Unconstitutional legislation ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/unconstitutional-legislation-and-decisions/)

The High Court has the power to cancel any law or part of any law that is
unconstitutional. Discusses what constitutes unconstitutional legislation and
how legislation is judged to be unconstitutional.

  * [ Judicial review of public decisions ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/judicial-review-public-decisions/)

Administrative decisions may be judicially reviewed by the High Court to
determine whether they are illegal. Find out how to initiate judicial review
proceedings.

  * [ Access to environmental information ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/access-to-environmental-information/)

You have the right to access certain information about the environment and
pollutants that may affect it. Find out how to access environmental
information.

**This document is in:** [ Environment and the law
](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/)

  * [ Judicial review in planning and environmental matters ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/judicial-review-in-planning-and-environmental-matters/)

Public decisions may be judicially reviewed by the High Court to determine
whether they are illegal. Find out about judicial review in the environmental
and planning areas.

**This document is in:** [ Environment and the law
](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/)
