###  **Do I need planning permission for work on a protected structure?**

You will need [ planning permission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-
permission/) if you want to do work on a protected structure that would
materially affect its character. This means that many types of work, which in
another building would be considered exempted development, may not be exempted
if the building is a protected structure. Depending on the nature of the
structure and the features of interest, even work such as painting the
interior or replacing windows could affect its character and need planning
permission.

You should contact your local authority, if you are unsure about what work
will need planning permission for your particular building. You can apply to
your planning authority for a declaration under [ Section 57 of the Planning
and Development Act 2000
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/pub/0030/sec0057.html) about your
structure. This declaration states what types of work can be carried out
without affecting the character of the structure.

A declaration cannot exempt any works which would otherwise require planning
permission. A planning authority will issue this declaration within 12 weeks
of receiving a request. There is no fee for this service. You can take a case
to [ An Bord Pleanála
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-permission/an-bord-
pleanala/) if you disagree with the declaration.

You must apply for planning permission in the usual way if more extensive work
is planned. However, you will need to include more detail, such as drawings,
photographs or any other material necessary to explain how the proposed
alterations would affect the character of the structure.

The newspaper and site notices for the planning application must state that
the structure is a protected structure. You should check with your planning
authority to find out what additional information they need when applying for
planning permission on a protected structure. If your planning authority
refuse planning permission, [ you can appeal this decision to An Bord Pleanála
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-permission/appealing-
planning-permission-decision/) .

If you are getting work done on your protected structure, there is useful
information in the [ Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines for Local
Authorities ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/0937a-architectural-heritage-
protection-guidelines-for-planning-authorities/) . These are statutory
guidelines for planning authorities, but they are also useful for owners of
protected structures. There are also practical advice leaflets on topics such
as [ improving energy efficiency in traditional buildings (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/279129/adb2c10d-86d7-4632-8368-65faba79ad22.pdf#page=null)
, [ energy renovations in traditional buildings (pdf)
](https://www.heritagecouncil.ie/content/files/Deep_Energy_Renovation_of_Traditional_Buildings.pdf)
and [ repairing historic windows (pdf)
](https://www.buildingsofireland.ie/app/uploads/2019/10/Windows-A-Guide-to-
the-Repair-of-Historic-Windows-2007.pdf) .
