##  How to apply for guardianship

You do not require legal representation to apply for guardianship of your
child. Staff in your local District Court will provide you with assistance to
help guide you through the process.

The Courts Service has [ information on the steps for applying for
guardianship ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/arrangements-for-
children/how-to-apply-for-guardianship-custody-or-access) on its website.
Contact the staff in your local District Court for more information on the
process of making an application for guardianship.

If you would prefer to seek legal advice, contact a [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) . If you go to a family law solicitor,
you will have to pay solicitors' fees. You should be aware that solicitors'
fees in Ireland are not fixed and can vary considerably. Shop around and
obtain some quotes before you decide on a legal firm. Be aware however, that
your solicitor must explain all of the costs to you in advance. Contact
information for [ solicitors and law firms throughout Ireland
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/) is
available on the Law Society of Ireland's website.

Contact [ your nearest law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) for
information on [ legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-
advice-and-legal-aid/) . Information is also available from the [ Legal Aid
Board ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Home) . If you
are [ eligible for legal aid
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-
legal-advice-and-legal-aid/#34ad07) , you must pay a contribution towards
costs.
