##  Rates

VAT is charged at different rates for various goods and services. Revenue has
[ information on the different rates of VAT that apply
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/vat-rates/index.aspx) . Some examples are
included below.

**23%** is the standard rate of VAT. All goods and services that do not fall
into the reduced rate categories are charged at this rate. They include
alcohol, audio-visual equipment, car parts and accessories, CDs, computers,
consultancy services, cosmetics, detergents, diesel, fridges, furniture and
furnishings, hardware, jewellery, lawnmowers, machinery, office equipment, pet
food, petrol, paper, tobacco, toys, tools, bottled water, washing machines and
most medicines (non-oral).

**13.5%** is a reduced rate of VAT for items including coal, heating oil, vet
fees, building and building services, agricultural contracting services,
short-term car hire, cleaning and maintenance services.

**9%** is a second reduced rate. Gas and electricity were reduced to this rate
from 1 May 2022 and extended to 31 October 2024 by [ Budget 2024 ](/en/money-
and-tax/budgets/budget-2024/) .

The VAT rate for the hospitality and tourism sector also decreased from 13.5%
to 9%, for the period 1 November 2020 to 31 August 2023. This applied to
various entertainment services such as admission to cinemas, theatres,
museums, fairgrounds and amusement parks. VAT at 9% also applies to
hairdressing and certain printed materials such as brochures, maps and
programmes.

**4.8%** is a reduced rate of VAT specifically for agriculture. It applies to
livestock (excluding chickens), greyhounds and the hire of horses.

**0%** (Zero) VAT rating includes all exports, tea, coffee, milk, bread,
books, childrenâ€™s clothes and shoes, vegetable seeds and fruit trees,
fertilisers, large animal feed, oral medicine for humans and animals,
disability aids such as wheelchairs, crutches and hearing aids. It was
announced in Budget 2023 that the 0% rate would be extended from 1 January
2023 to newspapers (including digital editions), defibrillators, period
products and non-oral medicines for Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) and
nicotine replacement therapy. It was announced in Budget 2024 that the rate
for ebooks and audio books would be reduced to 0% (from 9%) from 1 January
2024.

**Exempt from VAT**

You do not have to pay any VAT on financial, medical or educational services.
You may also not pay VAT for live theatrical and musical performances (except
those where food or drink is served during all or part of the performance).

**Difference between exemption and zero-rating**

If a business person supplies taxable goods or services, including zero-rated
ones, they can claim VAT back from the government on their taxable business
purchases. However, if someone only supplies exempt goods or services, they
cannot reclaim VAT.
