##  Committee on the Rights of the Child

The [ Committee on the Rights of the Child
](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRC/Pages/CRCIntro.aspx) is a United
Nations (UN) body of 18 independent experts that monitors the implementation
of the Convention by the countries that have signed up to it. It also monitors
implementation of the two Optional Protocols.

The countries must submit regular reports to the Committee on how the rights
are being implemented. They must submit an initial report 2 years after
signing up to the Convention, and then periodic reports every 5 years.

The Committee examines each report and addresses its concerns and
recommendations to the country in the form of 'concluding observations'.
Concluding observations include both positive aspects of a country's
implementation of the treaty and areas where further action needs to be taken
by the State.

The Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission (IHREC) [ submitted a report in
2013 to the Committee on the Rights of the Child
](https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CRC%2fC%2fIRL%2f3-4&Lang=en)
about how the rights of children are being implemented in Ireland. The [
Committee issued its concluding observations
](http://docstore.ohchr.org/SelfServices/FilesHandler.ashx?enc=6QkG1d%2FPPRiCAqhKb7yhsvOufvUWRUJlLHiLHKqpXZxUGOtzQF0l%2B37QzAKosbh7yc40d4J3IynFaWf0Egu6J99RK6Y%2FTHjpged5r1H3f3KQIiFieFkoeAPALAwKpbZz)
in 2016.

Ireland submitted its [ most recent periodic report (pdf) in August 2022
](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/09/Ireland-and-the-Rights-of-the-
Child-Final.pdf) with an [ Additional Submission to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child (pdf) ](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/12/IHREC-
Additional-Submission-to-the-CRC-Committee-December-2022.pdf) submitted in
December 2022. The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child published its [
Concluding Observations (pdf) on the combined fifth and sixth periodic reports
of Ireland
](https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/TreatyBodyExternal/DownloadDraft.aspx?key=Z2evgg/KQitPmEcSGMucoCNqFqXtQuuCWER+xgVyHyGmvMw3EsMfzMwfzMf2vQ/fnXOWwkJODlXYvV4TDj8u8A==)
on 7 February 2023.
