###  Environmental Impact Assessment Report

When submitting a planning application for a development that needs an EIA,
the applicant must also submit an Environmental Impact Assessment Report
(EIAR). The regulations set thresholds above which an EIAR is required.

The local authority (or An Bord Pleanála) can ask a developer for an EIAR even
if their development is below the thresholds. They will do this if they think
the development is likely to have a significant effect on the environment. The
full list of projects and threshold limits are set out in the Planning and
Development Regulations.

The EIAR is drawn up by the developer and must contain an analysis of the
likely effects (positive and negative), of a proposed development on the
environment. This includes the likely effects on:

  * People 
  * Flora 
  * Fauna 
  * Soil 
  * Water 
  * Air 
  * Landscape 
  * Cultural heritage 

The EIAR also sets out how the developer proposes to deal with any negative
effects. The EIAR must include a non-technical summary. The Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) has published [ guidelines
](https://www.epa.ie/pubs/advice/ea/EPA%20EIAR%20Guidelines.pdf) on the
information to be contained in an Environmental Impact Assessment Report.

It is not possible to get outline planning permission for developments covered
by the EIA. The notices about the application for planning permission must
include the fact that an EIAR is available. The local authority’s weekly list
of planning applications must also identify those applications involving an
EIAR.

You may get a copy of any EIAR used in a planning application from the [ local
authority ](https://www.housing.gov.ie/local-government/administration/local-
authorities/local-authorities) or [ An Bord Pleanála
](http://www.pleanala.ie/) . You may comment on an EIAR in the same way as any
other aspect of a planning application.
