##  Case studies

The following case studies show the options available to people on different
types of social welfare payments and the advantages and disadvantages of each
option.

**A: I’m getting Jobseeker’s Allowance and starting a full-time course in
further or higher education:**

You cannot get Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) and attend full-time education. If
you are getting Jobseeker’s Allowance you should apply for the Back to
Education Allowance (BTEA). If you qualify, your rate of payment on BTEA will
be the same as the payment you were getting (if you were getting an age-
related reduced rate of JA you get a standard BTEA rate of €220) and you will
keep any secondary benefits you are getting. You do not get the maintenance
component of the student grant with BTEA, but you will be financially better
off on BTEA than you would be on the maintenance grant alone.

Since the 2016/2017 academic year, people getting BTEA who take up work during
the academic year will be assessed under the rules (including means
assessment) that apply to their primary payment - the payment they qualified
for BTEA from. This only applies new applicants or people who return to BTEA
after a break. Previously part-time work during the academic year did not
affect the rate of BTEA paid.

You must still apply to be assessed for the fee component of the student
grant, covering the student contribution and any tuition fees or essential
field trip costs and for a postgraduate fee contribution (if relevant). You
should submit your application immediately.

**B: I’m getting a One-Parent Family Payment and starting a full-time course
in further or higher education:**

If you are getting a One-Parent Family Payment you have two options and you
need to work out which will give you the higher income.

1\. **You can stay on your One-Parent Family Payment and apply for a student
grant.** If you choose this option you will continue to get your One-Parent
Family Payment at your current rate and may qualify for the student grant.
However, you will lose any secondary benefits you are getting such as Rent
Supplement or Mortgage Interest Supplement.

2\. **You can transfer from your One-Parent Family Payment to the BTEA.** If
you choose this option and qualify for BTEA, you will not get the maintenance
component of the student grant. Your rate of payment on BTEA will be the same
as the rate of One-Parent Family Payment you were getting and you can keep any
secondary benefits you may be getting.

Since the 2016/2017 academic year, people getting BTEA who take up work during
the academic year will be assessed under the rules (including means
assessment) that apply to their primary payment - the payment they qualified
for BTEA from. This only applies new applicants or people who return to BTEA
after a break. Previously part-time work during the academic year did not
affect the rate of BTEA paid.

You must still apply to be assessed for the fee component of the student
grant, covering the student contribution and any tuition fees/essential field
trip costs and for a postgraduate fee contribution (if relevant). You should
submit your application immediately.

**C: I’m getting a Disability Allowance and starting a full-time course in
further or higher education:**

If you are getting a Disability Allowance (DA) you have 2 options and you need
to work out which will give you the higher income.

1\. You can stay on your Disability Allowance and apply for a student grant.
If you choose this option you will continue to get your Disability Allowance
at your current rate. However, you will lose secondary benefits such as Rent
Supplement or Mortgage Interest Supplement. If you are living at home, your
parents’ income could affect the amount of grant you get. It may mean you get
a reduced amount of maintenance grant, or just the fee component of the
student grant, or neither. If your course of study has an Erasmus component
(study at a college abroad), your DA payment will not be paid while you are
absent from the State.

2\. You can transfer from your Disability Allowance to the Back to Education
Allowance (BTEA). If you choose this option and qualify for BTEA you will not
get the maintenance component of the student grant. Your rate of payment on
BTEA will be the same as the rate of Disability Allowance you were getting and
you can keep any secondary benefits you may be getting. Your BTEA will
continue to be paid if you are required to study abroad for an Erasmus year.

Since the 2016/2017 academic year, people getting BTEA who take up work during
the academic year will be assessed under the rules (including means
assessment) that apply to their primary payment - the payment they qualified
for BTEA from. This only applies to new applicants or people who return to
BTEA after a break. Previously part-time work during the academic year did not
affect the rate of BTEA paid.

You must still apply to be assessed for the fee component of the student
grant, covering the student contribution and any tuition fees/essential field
trip costs and for a postgraduate fee contribution (if relevant). You should
submit your application immediately.

  

_**Page edited:** 4 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20welfare%20payments%20and%20the%20student%20grant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20welfare%20payments%20and%20the%20student%20grant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
