**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> Claiming a social welfare payment

#  Claiming a social welfare payment

  * [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-a-social-welfare-payment/)

Explains how to claim a social welfare payment and where you can get help to
fill in the application form.

  * [ Applying for social welfare payments and services online ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

  * [ Claiming for a child dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/)

You can get an increase in your social welfare payment for a child dependant.
This page explains when you can claim an Increase for a Qualified Child (IQC).

  * [ Claiming for an adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/)

You can get an increase in your social welfare payment for your adult
dependant. This document explains who qualifies as an adult dependant.

  * [ Making a late claim ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/making-a-late-claim/)

In general, you must apply for a social welfare payment within a set time
limit. This page explains how to make a late application and get your payment
backdated.

  * [ Taxation of social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

Find out which social welfare payments are taxable, and which payments are
not.

  * [ Examples of how social welfare payments are taxed ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-taxed/)

See examples of how social welfare payments are taxed, such as Maternity
Benefit, Jobseekerâ€™s Benefit, and Illness Benefit.

  * [ Changes that can affect your social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/)

A change in your circumstances can affect your entitlement to a social welfare
payment. This document gives some examples of the changes that can affect your
social welfare payment.

  * [ Claiming an extra half-rate social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/)

It is generally only possible to claim one social welfare assistance or
insurance based payment at a time. However, in certain circumstances you may
qualify for your social welfare payment and half of another payment. Find out
more.

  * [ Social welfare overpayments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-welfare-overpayments/)

The Department of Social Protection recoups overpayments of social welfare
benefits and entitlements. Find out how overpayments are collected

  * [ Household Budget Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/household-budget-scheme/)

The Household Budget Scheme aims to help people getting certain social welfare
payments to spread the cost of household bills throughout the year. Find out
if you qualify and how to apply.

  * [ Going abroad or on holidays and social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/going-abroad-and-social-welfare-payments/)

Outlines the social welfare payments that will continue to be paid if you go
abroad. It also lists the payments that will not be paid if you go abroad.

  * [ How social welfare payments are paid ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-social-welfare-payments-are-paid/)

Find out how social welfare payments are paid.

  * [ Combining social insurance contributions from abroad ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/)

Combining social insurance contributions paid in Ireland and abroad can help
you qualify for a social welfare payment. Find out more.
