##  Interest on savings – AER and CAR

_Annual Equivalent Rate_ (AER) and _Compound Annual Rate_ (CAR) both show you
the real interest you will earn on savings or interest-based investments at
the end of a year.

AER is the amount of interest earned in a year. AER is useful for comparing
the return on savings accounts because it shows how much is earned regardless
of how often interest is credited to an account. It is standard practice in
Ireland to list interest as AER for savings accounts. You may earn less than
the AER because your money may not be invested for a full year. AER is usually
quoted without taking [ DIRT ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-
investments/deposit-interest-retention-tax/) into account.

Sometimes firms use _Compound Annual Rate (CAR)_ instead of AER on savings and
investment products, for example, tracker bonds.

AER and CAR both take into account how often interest is paid because when the
interest is added to your savings your savings increase. As a result, the next
time the interest on your savings is calculated this increases too. This
called compound interest – see example below.

If a financial institution, quotes an AER or CAR rate for an account, there
may also be terms and conditions attached to that account which can stop you
from getting the full rate. For example, you may not get the full rate if you
withdraw your savings before a certain date.

AER and CAR do not take into account fees or charges.

The CCPC has [ savings comparison ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money-
tools/) tools that show you the rate and amount of interest paid by savings
and deposit accounts that are available.

**Example of compound interest:**

If a financial institution quotes an interest rate of 4% per year compounded
every 6 months, it pays 2% compound interest every 6 months. The amount of
interest that is paid at the end of 6 months then earns interest for the
second 6 months of the year. For this reason, 4% compounded every 6 months, is
not the same as 4% compounded annually.

For example, you invest **€500** with your bank at a rate of **4%** each year,
compounded every 6 months. For the first 6 months, the interest of 2% on €500
gives €10. This interest is then added to the initial amount to give a running
total of €510. The interest for the second 6 months of the year is 2% of €510
= €10.20. Added to the €10 for the first 6 months, this gives €20.20 for the
year. The annual interest rate is therefore 20.20/500 x 100 = 4.04%.

_**Page edited:** 30 August 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/savings-and-investments/interest-on-loans-and-
savings/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Interest%20on%20loans%20and%20savings&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/savings-and-investments/interest-on-loans-and-
savings/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/savings-and-investments/interest-on-loans-and-
savings/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Interest%20on%20loans%20and%20savings&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/savings-and-investments/interest-on-loans-and-
savings/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
