##  Your rights as a pension scheme member

The [ Pensions Authority ](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/) is the
regulatory body for occupational pensions. Occupational pension schemes must
register with the Authority.

The [ Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman ](https://www.fspo.ie/) is the
body responsible for dealing with complaints against pension providers and
regulated financial service providers. For more information, see [ making a
complaint about your pension ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/) .

[ The Pensions Authority publishes information leaflets
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/en/i_have_a_pension_prsa/checklists_and_guides/)
on the pension laws. It provides information to members of pension schemes
about your rights under the legislation. If you have a complaint, the
Authority will advise you about your rights.

If necessary, the Authority has extensive powers to inspect the scheme's books
and records, to enter premises and to require people to give explanations. It
may apply to the High Court to have pension scheme trustees replaced in order
to protect the interests of the members.

Some of the most important rights you have as a member of a pension scheme are
the right to information and the right to be involved in the scheme.

**The right to information**

The trustees of the scheme must provide information to members, prospective
members, their spouses, people entitled or prospectively entitled to benefits
under the scheme and to representatives of trade unions.

You are entitled to get information about the scheme, about how it is
administered, what rights you have and what obligations you have. The trustees
must tell you if more than 5% of the scheme's assets are invested in the
employer's business or in any one investment.

The trustees issue a report each year on the running of the pension scheme,
including the main issues affecting the scheme and information about the
schemeâ€™s membership and investment performance.

Active and deferred members must get a pension benefit statement each year.
Deferred members are members who have left an employment but kept an
entitlement to pension benefits in the future. The pension benefit statement
includes:

  * The pension benefits you have built up. 
  * The amount of pension contributions paid by you and your employer over the last 12 months. 
  * Your estimated pension benefits at retirement age. For defined contribution schemes, this will include estimates for 2 situations: one best estimate and one for unfavourable circumstances. 

For defined contribution schemes, the pension benefit statement also includes
the costs deducted by the scheme over the last 12 months.

For defined benefit schemes, the statement also includes information on the
funding level of the scheme.

**The right to be involved in the scheme**

In certain cases, you are entitled to be involved in the selection of
trustees. This is the case if your scheme has 50 or more qualified members or
12 or more qualified members of a directly invested scheme. A qualified member
is a member of the scheme currently in employment or a pensioner, but does not
include a member who is covered only for death in service or a non-member (for
example, a dependant) who is receiving benefits from the scheme.

Members can elect half the total number of trustees (excluding the
chairperson), subject to a minimum of two.
