###  Agri-Taxation Review / Farming Measures

**Income tax** measures for farmers include:

  * Increase the amounts of income exempted from long term leasing by 50% and introduce a 4th threshold for lease periods of 15 or more years with income of up to â‚¬40,000 being exempted 
  * Allow relief where the lessee is a company 
  * Remove the 40 years of age threshold for leasing relief 
  * Allow income averaging where there is on-farm diversification 
  * Increase income averaging from 3 to 5 years 

The **VAT flat-rate scheme** compensates unregistered farmers for VAT incurred
on their farming inputs. The flat-rate addition will be increased from 5% to
5.2% from 1 January 2015. The flat-rate addition is reviewed annually in
accordance with the EU VAT Directive and the increase to 5.2% in 2015
continues to achieve full compensation for farmers.

**Farm restructuring CGT relief** is available where the first transaction in
the restructuring (e.g. sale, purchase or exchange of land) is carried out by
31 December 2015 with the restructuring to be completed within 24 months. The
deadline for the completion of the first restructuring transaction is being
extended to 31 December 2016.

Teagasc certification guidelines are being amended to enable whole farm
replacement to be eligible for the farm restructuring relief subject to
meeting the conditions laid down by Teagasc.

**CGT retirement relief** is being amended so that, subject to other
conditions, land that has been leased for up to 25 years in total (increased
from 15) ending with disposal will qualify for the relief.

Amendments to CGT retirement relief are also being made to provide (in the
case of land disposals outside the family) that land currently let under
conacre arrangements which end with disposal on or before 31 December 2016 or
which (before 31 December 2016) is instead leased out for minimum periods of 5
years to a maximum of 25 years ending with disposal will, subject to other
conditions, also qualify for CGT retirement relief.

Changes are being introduced to target **CAT agricultural relief** to active
farmers. From 1 January 2015, and subject to other conditions, the relief will
be available only in respect of agricultural property gifted to or inherited
by active farmers and to people who are not active farmers but who lease out
the property on a long-term basis for agricultural use to such farmers.

Agricultural leases of between 5 and 35 years in duration to active farmers
will be exempt from **stamp duty** .

**Consanguinity relief** , which applies to transfers of non-residential
property to certain relatives, is due to expire on 31 December 2014\. This
relief, which halves the applicable rate of stamp duty, will be extended for a
period of 3 years in certain circumstances where the transferor is 65 years or
under and the transferee is an active farmer.
