##  What is mortgage protection insurance?

When you get a mortgage to buy your home, you will generally need to take out
mortgage protection insurance. This is a particular type of life assurance
that is taken out for the term of the mortgage. It pays off the mortgage if
you, or someone you have the mortgage with, dies.

[ The lender is legally required
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/act/24/section/126/enacted/en/html#sec126)
to make sure that you have mortgage protection insurance before giving you a
mortgage. There are some exceptions to this, see below.

If your lender offers a particular insurance policy, you do not have to buy
it. You can shop around for a mortgage protection policy that suits your
needs. Your lender cannot refuse you a mortgage because you don't buy the
policy it offers.

Mortgage protection should be paid on a joint life, first death basis. This
means that the mortgage is repaid when the first person dies if you are a
couple.

You should review your mortgage protection policy regularly and ensure that
you take out additional cover, if necessary. For example, you may need
additional cover if you extend the term of your mortgage. You must keep your
payments up to date. If you go into arrears, the policy may lapse.

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) publishes [ detailed
information on mortgage protection insurance
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/mortgage-protection-
insurance/) .

**Exceptions to the legal requirement to have mortgage protection insurance**

You do not have to take out mortgage protection insurance if:

  * You are over 50 years old 
  * The mortgage is not on your principal private residence (your home) 
  * You already have enough life insurance to pay off the home loan if you die 
  * You cannot get this insurance, for example, because of a current serious illness or dangerous job 

Some lenders may insist that you take out mortgage protection insurance as a
condition of giving you a mortgage, even if there is no legal requirement in
your case.

If you die without mortgage insurance protection, there will be no insurance
policy to pay off the mortgage. This means that the joint owner or your
beneficiaries will have to continue repaying the mortgage.

The requirement to take out mortgage protection and the exemptions to this are
set-out in [ Section 126 of the Consumer Credit Act 1995
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0024/sec0126.html#sec126) .
