##  Maintenance

There is a legal responsibility on both spouses to maintain each other and any
dependent children in accordance with their means. Separated or divorced
parents are responsible for the maintenance of their children and may have
maintenance responsibilities in respect of each other, depending on the terms
of the separation or divorce.

Civil partners are also legally obliged to maintain each other and any
dependent children in accordance with their means and may have maintenance
responsibilities in respect of each other if the civil partnership is
dissolved, depending on the terms of the dissolution.

Cohabiting parents do not have a financial responsibility to each other but
both parents have a responsibility for the maintenance of their children. A
cohabitant who is a guardian of their partnerâ€™s child, or the child their
partner has the day-to-day care of, has a financial responsibility to the
child.

Since 4 June 2024, child maintenance payments are not included in the means
test for social assistance payments. However, if you are getting maintenance
that is not child maintenance, this will continue to be means-tested. For
example, any spousal maintenance you get will be means-tested.

If a cohabiting relationship ends, you may have a right to maintenance under
the [ redress scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-
for-cohabiting-couples/) .

You can [ find out about maintenance here ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-parents/) . There is also
information on [ how maintenance is assessed for social welfare payments
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/) and [ how
maintenance affects your tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/) .
