##  Joint assessment

The joint assessment option is usually the most favourable basis of assessment
for a married couple or civil partners. This option is automatically given by
the tax office when you advise them of your marriage or civil partnership, but
this does not prevent you from choosing any of the options examined earlier.
Under this option, the tax credits and standard rate cut-off point can be
allocated between spouses to suit their own circumstances.

If only one spouse or civil partner has taxable income, all tax credits and
the standard rate cut-off point will be given to the spouse or civil partner
with the income.

If both of you have taxable income, you can decide which of you is to be the
assessable spouse or nominated civil partner. The assessable spouse or
nominated civil partner is responsible for filing tax returns and paying any
tax due. You can select the assessable person using [ myAccount
](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) or by writing to Revenue before
31 March in the year you want the selection to apply. They continue to be the
assessable person unless you both decide to change that. If you do not make a
selection, the person with the higher income is the assessable person.

You then ask the tax office to allocate the tax credits and standard rate cut-
off point between you in whatever way you want. (The Employee Tax Credit,
employment expenses and the increase in standard rate cut-off point of â‚¬33,000
in 2024 are not transferable).

You will both receive updated Tax Credit Certificates showing the allocation
of your credits and rate band.

If Revenue does not get a request from you to allocate your tax credits in any
particular way, it will normally give all the tax credits (other than the
other partner's Employee and expense tax credits) to the spouse or civil
partner being assessed. The spouse or civil partner being assessed must
complete the return of income for the couple and is charged for tax on the
joint income of the couple.

If one spouse or civil partner is self-employed, joint assessment can still
apply. The flexibility this option brings can be convenient - especially if
one of you pays tax under the PAYE system and the other pays tax under the
self-assessment system. Under joint assessment, you let your circumstances
determine if most of the tax should be paid under PAYE or in a lump sum on
assessment. This is determined by the way in which the tax credits are
allocated. If you choose to pay most of your tax under PAYE, your credits can
be transferred to the self-employed person (but not employment expenses or the
Employee Tax Credit).

If a refund is due at the end of the year, it will be repaid to each person in
proportion to the amount of tax each has paid.
