##  Separate assessment

Under the separate assessment option, the tax affairs of spouses or civil
partners are independent of each other. The difference between separate
assessment and assessment as a single person is that some tax credits are
divided equally between you under the separate assessment option. These tax
credits are:

  * [ Married or Civil Partner's Tax Credit ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/marital-and-civil-status/personal-tax-credit/index.aspx)
  * [ Age Tax Credit ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/age-tax-credit/index.aspx)
  * [ Blind Person's Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-reliefs-for-people-with-a-visual-impairment/)
  * [ Incapacitated Child Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/incapacitated-child-tax-credit/) . 

The [ Employee Tax Credit ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/income-and-employment/employee-tax-credit/index.aspx)
(formerly known as the PAYE tax credit) and expenses (if any), are allocated
to the appropriate spouse/civil partner. Any tax credits other than the
Employee Tax Credit and employment expenses that are unused by one partner can
be claimed by the other spouse or civil partner. The tax credits are not
usually adjusted until after the end of the tax year.

Any tax credits that are unused (other than the Employee Tax Credit and
employment expenses) and the standard rate cut-off point up to €51,000 in 2024
(€49,000 in 2023) can be transferred to the other spouse or civil partner but
only at the end of the tax year. The increase in the standard rate tax band of
up to €33,000 in 2024 (€31,000 in 2023) is not transferable between partners.
If you think you have unused tax credits or standard rate cut-off point,
contact Revenue for a review after the end of the tax year. Overall, the
amount of the tax that is payable under this option (separate assessment) is
the same that is payable under the joint assessment option discussed below.

The claim for separate assessment must be made between 1 October of the
previous year and 31 March in the year you want separate assessment to apply.
Either spouse or civil partner can request this form of assessment, although
the other spouse or civil partner will have to confirm this request. Separate
assessment will then continue until you request to change it. These requests
can be made in [ myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) or by
writing to [ Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) . Each
spouse or civil partner can complete a separate return of their own income.
