##  Prison facilities in Ireland

There are 12 institutions in the Irish prison system. Ten are traditional
closed facilities with both internal and perimeter security, while 2 are open
centres with reduced security measures.

Open prisons operate a regime based on the voluntarily accepted discipline of
the prisoners. By providing prisoners with more independence and
responsibility, as well as increased access to educational, employment and
developmental opportunities, open centres are designed to prepare offenders
for their reintegration into civil society upon release.

The majority of female prisoners are accommodated in [ the purpose built
Dóchas Centre ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/dochas-centre/) in [
Mountjoy Prison in Co. Dublin ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/mountjoy-
prison/) , with the remainder accommodated in [ Limerick Prison
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/limerick-prison/) .

Information on individual prisons is included below.

[ **Arbour Hill** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/arbour-hill/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males. The prisoner profile is
largely made up of long term sentenced prisoners.

[ **Castlerea Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/castlerea-prison/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males. It is the committal prison
for remand and sentenced prisoners in Connacht and also accommodates
committals from counties Cavan, Donegal and Longford.

[ **Cloverhill Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/cloverhill-
prison/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males, which primarily caters for
remand prisoners committed from the Leinster area.

[ **Cork Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/cork-prison/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males. It is the committal prison
for counties Cork, Kerry and Waterford.

[ **Dóchas Centre** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/dochas-centre/)

A closed, medium security prison for females aged 18 years and over in the
Mountjoy Prison facility. It is the committal prison for females committed on
remand or sentenced from all Courts outside the Munster area.

[ **Limerick Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/limerick-prison/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males and females. It is the
committal prison for males for counties Clare, Limerick and Tipperary and for
females for all six Munster counties.

[ **Loughan House** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/loughan-house/)

An open, low security prison for males aged 18 years and over who are regarded
as requiring lower levels of security.

[ **Midlands Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/midlands-prison/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males. It is the committal prison
for counties Carlow, Kildare, Kilkenny, Laois, Offaly and Westmeath.

[ **Mountjoy Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/mountjoy-prison/)

A closed, medium security prison for adult males. It is the main committal
prison for Dublin city and county.

[ **Portlaoise Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/portlaoise-
prison/)

A closed high security prison for adult males. It is the committal prison for
those sent to custody from the Special Criminal Court and prisoners
accommodated here include those linked with subversive crime.

[ **Shelton Abbey** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/shelton-abbey/)

An open, low security prison for males aged 19 years and over who are regarded
as requiring lower levels of security.

[ **Wheatfield Prison** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prison/wheatfield-place-
of-detention/)

A closed, medium security place of detention for adult males and for sentenced
17-year-old juveniles.
