###  Income tax

The Home Carer's Tax Credit that is given to married couples or civil partners
where one spouse or civil partner works in the home caring for a dependent
person is increasing from €1,000 to €1,100.

The Earned Income Credit (pdf) for taxpayers earning self-employed trading or
professional income in certain cases and for business owner/managers who are
ineligible for a PAYE credit on their salary income is increasing from €550 to
€950. **** ****

The residential rental property relief available for qualifying interest
payments on monies borrowed to purchase, improve or repair residential rental
property is being increased from 75% to 80%. This measure will apply to both
new and existing mortgages.

The ceiling for exemption from income tax under the Rent a Room scheme for
income received from the letting of a room or rooms in a person’s principal
private residence is being increased from €12,000 to €14,000 for 2017 and
subsequent years. ****

An income tax rebate incentive for first-time buyers of new homes is being
introduced to help fund the deposit required under the Central Bank macro-
prudential rules. It will consist of a rebate of income tax paid over the
previous four years up to 5% of the purchase price of up to €400,000. Where
new homes are valued between €400,000 and €600,000 the maximum relief of
€20,000 will continue to be available. The house must be a new build and
applicants must take out a mortgage of at least 80% of the purchase price. The
scheme will run until the end of 2019.

The Home Renovation Incentive (HRI), which provides an income tax credit to
homeowners who carry out renovation and improvement works on their principal
private residences, is being extended until 31 December 2018.

The Living City Initiative, which aims to assist the regeneration of retail
and commercial districts and encourage families to live in historic buildings
in city centres is being amended to encourage an increase in the take-up of
the scheme. This involves extending the availability of the scheme to
landlords, while for residential applicants it removes the restriction on the
maximum floor size of the property, removes the requirement that the property
must have been previously used as a dwelling, and reduces the minimum amount
of expenditure needed to qualify.

A new **Fishers Tax Credit** is being introduced to assist the viability of
the fishing sector. Fishers who have fished for wild fish or wild shellfish
for at least 80 days in a tax year can claim an income tax credit of €1,270
per annum.

Foreign Earnings Deduction (FED) is being extended until the end of 2020. In
addition:

  * Qualifying countries are being extended to include Colombia and Pakistan 
  * The minimum number of days for travel is being reduced to 30 per annum 

The Special Assignee Relief Programme (SARP) is being extended for a further 3
years until the end of 2020.

The Start Your Own Business tax relief is being extended for 2 years until the
end of 2018.
