###  Rates

Since January 2024 the minimum weekly payment for participants (based on 19.5
hours worked) is €259.50.

If your Jobseeker’s Allowance payment (including increases for dependants) was
€232 a week or less, then you will get the minimum Tús weekly rate of €259.50
(that is €232 plus €27.50).

If your weekly Jobseeker’s Allowance (including any increases for dependants)
was €232.01 or more, then you will get the equivalent rate plus €27.50 (there
are some exceptions to this).

Participants will keep any extra benefits and the medical card, provided they
are still eligible.

**Additional income**

If you have any additional income, for example, from part-time work, it will
not affect your Tús payment. However, the rules that apply to Jobseeker’s
Allowance about reporting a change in your circumstances also apply to the Tús
payment.

You should tell your local development company or Údarás na Gaeltachta and
your local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office if there is any
change in your circumstances. If you don’t you may be overpaid.

If your circumstances change, for example, you get married, have a child or
change your working hours, you must let your Tús supervisor know, as it may
affect your payment.

You also need to let your supervisor know if your dependant gets a job, as
their income will be assessed as means and your Tús payment may be reduced.
Your payment cannot be reduced below the minimum rate of €259.50. You should
complete an [ EP1 form
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/downloads/Community_Employment_and_Job_Initiative/EP1_Participant_Change_of_Circumstance_Form.pdf)
and give it to your supervisor.

**Spouses or partners and Tús**

If you get a place on a Tús scheme and your spouse or partner is claiming
Jobseeker's Allowance, Disability Allowance (DA) or Farm Assist in their own
right, they can claim an Increase for a Qualified Adult with their JA, DA or
Farm Assist. Your income from the Tús scheme (as a single person) is then
assessed as insurable employment against their payment.

If you are on a Tús scheme and your spouse or partner gets a place on a Tús
scheme, you will each get a single rate of the Tús payment together with half
of the Increases for a Qualified Child for any dependent children.
