###  **If you reach pension age on or after 1 September 2012**

If you reach pension age **on or after 1 September 2012** , you can be
assessed using either the average rules (see above) or the [ Total
Contributions Approach ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b6193-how-to-
calculate-your-state-pension-contributory-rate/#using-the-total-contributions-
approach) (TCA).

The Total Contributions Approach, also known as the _Aggregated Contributions
Method_ , does not use a yearly average to calculate the rate of pension.
Instead, the rate is based on the total number of contributions you have paid
before you reach the age of 66 or the [ age you defer your pension to
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/deferring-your-state-pension-
contributory/) .

Using the TCA, you will qualify for the maximum personal rate of State Pension
(Contributory) if you have 2,080 or more PRSI contributions (or 40 years’ of
employment).

The TCA calculation includes the [ HomeCaring Periods Scheme
](http://homecaring%20periods%20schemehomecaring%20periods%20scheme/) and
Long-Term Carers Contributions, which can help you to either qualify for the
SPC, or get a higher rate. See ‘Carers and the State Pension (Contributory)’
below.

You can also have up to 10 years [ credited contributions ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-
insurance-contributions/) used as part of your pension calculation. **However,
your combined HomeCaring Periods and credited contributions cannot total more
than 1,040 (20 years).**

If your combined total of paid contributions, HomeCaring Period and credited
contributions is less than 2,080, you will qualify for a reduced rate of
pension.

For example, a combined total of 1,040 paid contributions, made up of
HomeCaring Period and credited contributions, would entitle you to 50% of the
maximum pension (1,040 / 2,080 = 50%).
