###  Does the clock stop at any time during my detention?

It may. If, during your detention, you are taken from the Garda station to a
hospital or other suitable place for medical attention, any period of absence
from the Garda station is not taken into account in the calculation of your
detention.

Other periods may not be counted, depending on the section of legislation you
are detained under. If you are detained under Section 4 or Section 42 and
questioning is suspended for a period of time between midnight and 8am to
allow you to rest, the time the questioning is suspended is not counted.
However, you must consent to this suspension. Also, if you are certified by a
doctor as unfit for questioning, the time the questioning is suspended is not
counted.

If you are detained under Sections 4, 42 or 50 and you attend court in
connection with an application relating to the lawfulness of your detention,
the time you are absent from the Garda station is not counted.

If your period of detention would end while you are at the venue where an
application is being made by the Garda√≠ for a further detention period, it is
considered not to end until the final decision of the court on the
application.

The [ Criminal Justice Act 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2011/en/act/pub/0022/index.html) amended
detention under Section 4 for certain [ arrestable offences
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-
criminal-cases/) to allow your detention to be suspended and for you to be
released during the suspension. These offences include offences in the areas
of banking and finance, company law, money laundering, fraud, corruption,
competition, consumer protection and cybercrime. The total period of the
suspension cannot be longer than four months.
