##  Who is responsible for food safety in the European Union?

The [ European Food Safety Authority ](http://www.efsa.europa.eu/) is an
independent EU agency whose main role is to provide independent scientific
advice. It also assesses risks relating to the food chain and informs the
public accordingly.

While the European Food Safety Authority advises on possible food safety
risks, other EU institutions (including the European Commission, Parliament
and Council) are responsible for risk management. These EU institutions take
advice from the European Food Safety Authority, and then propose and adopt
legislation. They also enforce regulatory and control measures if needed.

The [ European Commission ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-
institutions/european-commission/) includes a [ Directorate-General for Health
and Food Safety ](http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_food-safety/index_en.htm) .
This Directorate General is responsible for EU policy on food safety and
health. It also monitors the implementation of related laws. You can find the
latest [ EU food safety news and reports
](https://ec.europa.eu/info/departments/health-and-food-safety_en) on the
Directorate Generalâ€™s website.

The [ EU Health and Food Audits and Analysis
](https://food.ec.europa.eu/horizontal-topics/official-controls-and-
enforcement/health-and-food-audits-and-analysis_en) \- formerly the EU Food
and Veterinary Office - is responsible for monitoring food compliance with
various EU laws, including those on food hygiene. It inspects and audits EU
states and countries exporting to the EU. It also carries out audits regarding
animal health and welfare, plant health, and the use of chemicals (such as
pesticides, veterinary medicines and growth stimulants).
