###  Assistance from the presiding officer

If you have a visual impairment, a disability or a literacy difficulty that
prevents you from voting without assistance, the presiding officer can help
you mark the ballot paper.

The presiding officer and the personation agents go with you to a part of the
polling station where a conversation at a normal volume cannot be overheard. A
personation agent is a representative of a candidate who supervises the
polling and helps prevent electoral offences.

If necessary, the presiding officer will suspend entry to the polling station
and have it cleared, to ensure that nobody can hear how you vote. The
personation agents are there as witnesses to make sure that the presiding
officer follows your instructions. As with everyone involved in a poll, there
is a statutory obligation on personation agents to keep your vote secret.

The presiding officer asks how you want to vote and marks the ballot paper
according to your preferences. They will read out any information from the
ballot paper you may need to hear to make your decision. They then put the
ballot paper in the ballot box.

The law forbids a presiding officer from acting on any written instructions
received from a voter. This is because someone else may have written or
changed the instructions and it would make it harder to be sure that your vote
was being cast the way you want.

If you want the presiding officer to help you vote, you should go to the
polling station well before it closes at night. The law allows a presiding
officer to refuse a request for assistance during the last two hours of voting
if helping one elector would prevent others from voting. This restriction does
not apply to companion voting - you can be helped to vote by a companion at
any time during polling hours.
