##  The Legislature

The legislative power is the power to make laws. The Oireachtas does this
through introducing and changing [ legislation ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/legislation/) . Articles [ 15 to 27
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#part4) of the Constitution
give this power to the national parliament or the Oireachtas. The Oireachtas
comprises:

  * The [ Dáil ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/)
  * The [ Seanad ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/the-seanad/)
  * The [ President ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/president-introduction-to-the-president-of-ireland/)

The main function of the Oireachtas is to make new laws and amend existing
laws. New laws start as Bills, and must be debated by the Dáil and Seanad and
passed by both Houses before the President can sign the bill into law. If the
Seanad does not pass a bill, the Dáil can still enter the bill into law, but
must pass a resolution declaring that the Bill is deemed to have been passed
by both Houses. When a bill becomes law, it is known as an [ Act of the
Oireachtas ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/acts.html) .

Any sitting TD ( _Teachta Dála_ , the name given to elected members of the
Dáil) or Senator can publish a Bill and try to have it passed by the House,
but the Bill must have the Government’s support if it involves spending public
money _._

The President has the power to refer a bill to the [ Supreme Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/) to seek a judgment that the law is
constitutional.

TDs are elected in [ general elections ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-
and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/the-general-election/) ,
which must be held at least every 5 years. Senators are either appointed by
the Taoiseach, or elected in Seanad elections, which take place after a
general election has been held.

The Oireachtas also elects the Government and passes budgets for Government
Departments.
