###  Factors that determine the cost of your insurance

Insurance companies will consider the following factors in calculating the
cost of your premium:

**Experience** . In general, the less experience you have as a driver, the
higher your premium is likely to be. Whether you are driving on a full or
provisional licence makes a huge difference to the cost of your motor
insurance premium. If you only have a provisional licence, you can expect to
pay hundreds of euro extra on your premium.

**Claims history** . All insurance companies will ask if you have ever had
insurance in your own name before. If not, they will ask if you have ever
driven under someone else's insurance without incident. This will be taken
into account when calculating a premium. Insurance becomes less expensive with
experience and a clean driving record.

**Where you live** . Those living in a major city, particularly Dublin, will
normally have a loading imposed. Some companies will also impose a loading if
the vehicle is not kept in a garage or driveway at night.

**Size of your vehicle** . The larger your vehicleâ€™s engine, the more
expensive it will be to insure. This owes to the fact that, statistically, the
faster and more powerful your vehicle is, the more likely it is to be involved
in an accident.

**Age of your vehicle** . The older your vehicle, the more difficult it can be
to insure.

**Value of your vehicle** . The value of a vehicle is taken into account when
calculating a premium for third party fire and theft, and comprehensive
insurance. A new vehicle is more expensive to replace than an old vehicle and
will cost more to insure.

**Your age** . The young and the old are considered by insurance companies to
represent high-risk categories of driver and are consequently made to pay
higher premiums.

**Profession and use** . A standard motor insurance policy will only cover the
vehicle for social, domestic and pleasure purposes, but not for the carriage
of goods. If the vehicle is being used for business purposes, then a loading
will apply. If the vehicle is being used commercially, then an even higher
loading will be imposed.

**Level of cover required** . In most cases, third party insurance will incur
a lower premium than third party fire and theft cover, while comprehensive
insurance is generally the most expensive form of cover. Many insurers also
offer optional extra forms of cover that increase the cost of your premium.
These additional forms of cover may include: no claims bonus protection,
windscreen cover, damaged or stolen personal items, emergency and recovery
service, and cover for a rental vehicle in the event of your own vehicle being
off the road.

**Excess** . Most insurance policies contain some type of an excess clause.
This means that you are liable for an agreed amount towards the cost of any
claim (e.g., the first 250 euro). You will not be able to claim for amounts
less than the excess. In most cases, opting to pay a high excess on claims
lowers the cost of your premium.
