####  Registering a birth after donor-assisted reproduction

The provisions set out in Parts 2 and 3 of the Children and Family
Relationships Act 2015 provide a legal framework for the donor-assisted human
reproduction process including [ registering the births ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/) of
children who are born in the State as a result of assisted human reproduction
involving donated eggs or sperm or embryos. These provisions came into effect
on 4 May 2020.

From 4 May 2020, the birth mother and the intending parent (the mother's
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant) of a donor-conceived child (born as a
result of a donor assisted human reproduction procedure) can now [ register
with the Registrar for Births, Deaths and Marriages ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/) , as
parents.

The regulations provide for two different scenarios depending on the date of
conception (the date the DAHR procedure is performed), **not the date of the
birth of the child.**

**Registering the birth of a child conceived after 4 May 2020**

The DAHR procedure must have been undertaken in a DAHR facility in Ireland
using a traceable sperm donor. Both parents can be registered as the parents
with the Registrar for Births, Deaths and Marriages as normal. The clinic will
need to provide a certificate confirming the details of the procedure.

**Registering the birth of a child conceived before 4 May 2020**

The DAHR procedure must have been undertaken in a DAHR facility in Ireland or
abroad using an anonymous or traceable sperm donor. In this case, only the
birth mother will be registered as the parent. A Declaration of Parentage is
required from the District Court to enable the intending parent (the person
intending to be the other parent) to be registered on the childâ€™s birth
certificate at re-registration. An application can be made to the Circuit
Court by an individual to get a Declaration of Parentage where parents are no
longer in a relationship.
