###  Necessity for a search warrant

A search warrant is often necessary before a Garda may search a premises or
any person present. However, certain legislation entitles the Gardai to enter
premises without a warrant, for example, the Intoxicating Liquor Acts, the
Public Dance Halls Act, and the Health Acts.

If a Garda gets a search warrant relating to certain offences he/she may
search the premises named and any person on the premises. Examples of this are
a search warrant issued under the [ Offences Against the State Act 1939
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1939/en/act/pub/0013/index.html) , or the [
Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud) Offences Act 2001
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2001/en/act/pub/0050/index.html) . Under the
[ Criminal Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1979
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0004/index.html) , as amended
by [ Section 6 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0026/sec0006.html#sec6) , the
Garda√≠ can obtain a warrant in relation to an [ arrestable offence
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-
criminal-cases/) .

Other legislation, for example, the Dublin Police Act, the Misuse of Drugs
Act, the Criminal Law Act and the Animal Remedies Act, entitles police
officers to search you and/or your vehicle without a warrant.

If one of these statutes is being invoked in order to search you without a
search warrant, you are entitled to told about it.

Evidence obtained on foot of an invalid search warrant or obtained without a
warrant may be excluded by the trial judge and excluded particularly if the
search involved a deliberate and conscious breach of your constitutional
rights.

In extraordinary excusing circumstances, the court may allow evidence obtained
as a result of a deliberate and conscious breach of the Constitution. However,
these circumstances are very rare, for example, a case involving an urgent
need to rescue a victim in danger.
