**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > Criminal trials

#  Criminal trials

  * [ Summonses in criminal prosecutions ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/summons/)

A summons is issued by your District Court in Ireland after a complaint has
been made against you by a Garda. There are important rules about the content
of the summons and how this document is served on you.

  * [ Legal representation in criminal cases ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/legal-representation-in-criminal-cases/)

The type of offence you are charged with determines what kind of legal
representation you will need in criminal cases. This page explains the types
of criminal offence and the duties of the defence counsel.

  * [ Time limits for the start of criminal proceedings ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/)

Information on the time limits for the commencement of criminal proceedings in
Ireland is provided.

  * [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/criminal-trial/)

An introduction to the various types of criminal trial that take place in
Ireland.

  * [ Disclosure in criminal cases ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/disclosure-in-criminal-cases/)

In a criminal trial the prosecution has a duty to disclose to the defence, in
advance of the trial, all relevant evidence which it has. However, this duty
can vary.

  * [ Criminal insanity and mental health ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/criminal-insanity-and-mental-health/)

The law regarding criminal insanity and mental health sets out rules on
fitness to plead, diminished responsibility and the Mental Health Review
Board.

  * [ Sentencing at criminal trials in Ireland ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sentence/)

Where a court in Ireland has found you guilty of an offence or you have
pleaded guilty, the judge will decide on your sentence. Read about the rules
on sentencing of criminals in Ireland.

  * [ Types of sentences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/)

There are a range of sentences available to judges that can be imposed on
someone found guilty of a criminal offence.

  * [ Fines for criminal offences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/)

Information on fines allowable for those summarily convicted in the District
Court or convicted on indictment in the Circuit Court or High Court.

  * [ Court poor box ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/)

Judges in courts in Ireland order offenders to make a donation to the Court
Poor Box (i.e., make a donation to a charity in lieu of conviction).

  * [ Drug Offenders Register ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/)

The Drug Offenders Register was introduced by the Criminal Justice Act 2006
and is based on the same principle as the Sex Offenders Register. It enables
the movements of convicted drug dealers to be recorded.

  * [ Monitoring and treatment of sex offenders in Ireland ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/)

This document provides information about the treatment and monitoring of sex
offenders in Ireland. It includes detail on the sex offenders register, post-
release supervision orders, sex offender orders and the treatment of sex
offenders in prison.
