##  Introduction

The [ Minister for Justice
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/our_ministers) is responsible for the
prison system in Ireland. However, [ the Irish Prison Service
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/) , an executive office established [ within the
Department of Justice
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/irish_prison_service_role) , controls
the day-to-day operation of Irish prisons.

The Irish Prison Service is responsible for the safe and secure custody of all
those committed to it by the courts. This includes people [ held on remand
](/en/justice/arrests/detention-after-arrest/) , [ detained on immigration
matters
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/66/section/20/enacted/en/html#sec20)
and [ sentenced to imprisonment ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/types-of-sentences#le06e6) .

In addition to ensuring that convicted people properly serve their sentences,
the Irish Prison Service is responsible for providing prisoners with
appropriate resources and opportunities to reduce the likelihood of their
reoffending and assisting prisoners with [ reintegrating into their
communities upon release ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-
services/reintegration/) .

This document provides practical information about the structure and operation
of the prison system in Ireland. It includes information on:

  * Prison facilities in Ireland 
  * Committal and admission procedures 
  * Prison transfers 
  * Supports for families of prisoners; and 
  * Detention on immigration matters 

The Irish Prison Service deals exclusively with offenders who are **18 years
of age or over** . You can find out more about [ children and the criminal
justice system in Ireland ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-
and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/) .

Section 35 of the [ Prisons Act 2007
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2007/en/act/pub/0010/index.html) provides for
the making of rules for the regulation and good government of prisons. [
Prison Rules 2007 (SI 252/2007)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2007/en/si/0252.html) , as [ amended
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/ResultsSITitle.html?q=Prison+Rules&q=2013&q=2014&search_type=si&button=Search)
, sets out, among other things, the rules in relation to admissions and
transfers.
