##  Employer obligations

As an employer, you must be transparent about how you are using and
safeguarding your employees' personal data, inside, and outside the
organisation. You must be accountable for your data processing activities and
be able to show how you meet data protection principles.

You should make an inventory of all the personal data that you hold. You
should then check it under the following headings, and ensure that you have
the required consent and legal basis to process the data:

  * Why are you holding it? 
  * How did you obtain it? 
  * Why was it originally gathered? 
  * How long will you retain it? 
  * How secure is it, both in terms of encryption and accessibility? 
  * Do you ever share it with third parties and on what basis might you do so? 

**Legal basis (legitimate reason) for processing personal data**

Your organisation needs a legal basis (a legitimate reason) to process an
employee’s personal data. Legitimate reasons include:

  * The employee has given their consent to the processing 
  * Processing is necessary to fulfil parts of an employee’s contract 
  * Processing is necessary in order to take steps at the request of the employee before entering into a contract. (For example, on matters of pay in an employment context) 
  * Complying with a legal obligation (For example, a statutory requirement to keep employee records) 
  * Processing is necessary to comply with the employee’s vital interests. (For example, where an individual’s medical history is disclosed to the hospital treating them after a serious road accident) 
  * For the purposes of the legitimate interests of the organisation. 

**Consent**

Consent is a legitimate reason for processing employee data and you should get
consent, if none of the other legal grounds above apply. You need to be aware
of your obligations when requesting consent from employees. The GDPR states
that consent must be ‘ _freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous_ ’.
This means that the data subject must be aware that they are consenting to
have their data processed and should not be forced into giving consent.

Before an employee gives consent to have their data processed, the employer
must show that they told employees why their personal data is being collected,
and how it will be used and handled. Silence, pre-ticked boxes or inactivity
cannot be taken as consent. A data subject can withdraw consent at any time,
and it must be as easy to withdraw consent as it is to give it.

**GDPR training and communication with employees and prospective employees**

As an employer, you must inform employees about:

  * What personal data you will be collecting (or if it will be collected by a third party) 
  * How the data will be processed 
  * Why the data will be processed 

You could have a Data Protection Notice displayed in your office to meet this
obligation.

You should also have a data protection policy in place and provide training to
employees on GDPR.

GDPR requires that certain information must be supplied to job candidates,
before their personal data is collected and processed. This information must
be clear and accessible and may be a privacy notice on the website and a
letter to the candidate. Employee training on data protection policies takes
place once the candidate is an employee.

**Data Subject Access Requests (DSARs)**

Employers must have procedures in place to respond to personal data access
requests from employees within 1 month. This can be extended by a further 2
months if requests are complex or numerous.

**Security obligations**

Data must be protected by ‘appropriate technical and organisational measures’.
Data must be kept secure, for example, by using anonymisation, encryption,
anti-virus security measures, or by backing up data. Employers must test these
security measures and be able to show that they have complied with GDPR
security obligations.

**Record-keeping and the right to correct**

Organisations should only keep data for as long as it takes to complete the
task it was collected for, or as required by law. Employers should have a
retention policy in place and be able to justify why data was retained.

Employees have the right to know what data an employer has on file about them
and they also have the right to correct this data. What happens to employee
data when a contract of employment is terminated should be documented in the
HR policies.

**Sharing and transferring personal data**

Organisations using third parties, such as recruitment agencies or payroll
providers to process employee data will be responsible for ensuring the third
party is GDPR compliant and they must have appropriate agreements in place.
You must also comply with GDPR obligations about transferring data outside of
the EU.

**Data protection officer**

Under GDPR some organisations must appoint a [ Data Protection Officer
](http://gdprandyou.ie/data-protection-officer/) , for example, public
authorities and bodies, government departments, organisations involved in
large-scale data processing, and organisations that process sensitive or
special category data.

**Report breaches**

You must report data breaches to the Data Protection Commission (DPC) within
72 hours of becoming aware of a breach. If you do not notify the DPC within 72
hours, you must provide a justification for the delay. Breaches that may harm
a data subject, for example, identity theft, must also be reported to the
person concerned.

**Penalties**

It is important that you comply with the legislation and put adequate policies
and procedures in place. Your organisation can be inspected and could face
significant penalties if your practices are in breach of GDPR.
