###  Advice from an accountant

Under the Mortgage Arrears Information and Advice Service, your participating
lender will pay €250 for a consultation with an accountant of your choice
drawn from a panel composed of members of recognised accountancy bodies
including the Institute of Chartered Accountants Ireland, the Association of
Certified Chartered Accountants, the Institute of Incorporated Public
Accountants and the Institute of Certified Public Accountants. You can find
out more about this in the [ protocol document (pdf) ](https://mabs.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/profserv_mortgage_financial_advice_service_protocol.pdf)
on mabs.ie, along with a [ list of participating accountants (pdf)
](https://mabs.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/MAIAS_Panel_26Jan2022.pdf) . The
[ Abhaile scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-
mortgage-arrears-support/) has a separate [ panel of accountants (pdf)
](https://mabs.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/abh.accountant.panel_.18.07.2022.pdf) that also
provide free financial advice.

**If an alternative arrangement is agreed**

The lender must monitor the arrangement on an ongoing basis and formally
review its appropriateness for you at least every 6 months. This review must
include checking with you whether your circumstances have changed since the
start of the arrangement or since the last review.

If you do not stick to the terms of an alternative repayment arrangement, the
lender’s Arrears Support Unit (ASU) must formally review your case, including
the Standard Financial Statement, immediately.

**If an alternative arrangement is not agreed**

It may not be possible for you and your lender to agree on an alternative
repayment arrangement. If the lender is not willing to offer you an
alternative repayment arrangement, they must give the reasons in writing. If
they do offer an arrangement, you may choose not to accept it.

In both of these cases, the lender must inform you in writing about other
options, including voluntary surrender, trading down or voluntary sale, and
the implications for you of each option. They must also inform you that you
are now outside the MARP, and that repossession proceedings can follow after 3
months – see 'Repossession proceedings' below.

The lender must also tell you what happens about any debt outstanding after
repossession or sale. It must tell you about [ personal insolvency options
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-
insolvency-options/) ; the importance of taking independent advice; and your
right to appeal or complain.
