##  Repossession proceedings

The lender must not apply to the courts to commence legal action for
repossession of your property until every reasonable effort has been made to
agree an alternative arrangement and a specified time period has elapsed.

In general, if you are co-operating with the lender, they must wait at least 8
months from the date your arrears were classified as a MARP case before
applying to the courts.

This 8-month period does not apply if you do not co-operate with the lender;
or if you perpetrate a fraud on the lender; or if there is a breach of
contract by you other than the existence of arrears - in such cases,
repossession proceedings can be started immediately. However, before you can
be classified as not co-operating, your lender must first write to you and
warn you that this might happen and tell you what steps you need to take to
avoid being classified as not co-operating.

For co-operating borrowers, if your lender does not offer you an alternative
repayment arrangement, or if you do not accept an alternative repayment
arrangement being offered, your lender must write to you as outlined in
'Resolution' above. For repossession, this letter must state:

  * That you are now outside the MARP, and that its protections no longer apply 
  * That legal proceedings may start 3 months from the date that the letter is issued or 8 months from the date the arrears arose, whichever date is later 

The 3 months will give you time to consider other options, such as voluntary
surrender, [ voluntary sale (pdf)
](https://www.mabs.ie/downloads/publications/16_10_13_Selling_your_house_to_pay_off_your_mortgage.pdf)
or a [ Personal Insolvency Arrangement
](/en/money_and_tax/personal_finance/debt/personal_insolvency/personal_insolvency_arrangements.html)
. You can also appeal the lender’s decision under the CCMA’s appeals process,
described above.

The lender or its legal advisers must notify you in writing immediately before
applying to the courts to start any legal action on repossession. Read more in
the [ MABS/Abhaile information guide (pdf) ](https://mabs.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/Abhaile_InformationGuide_A5-compressed.pdf) .

Even at this late stage, you may be able to access support under the [ Abhaile
scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-mortgage-arrears-
support/) . This scheme provides free legal and financial advice to help with
your situation. It also provides a court mentor service, which offers support
and advice for borrowers on court proceedings, as well as direct referral back
to MABS.

Your property may be repossessed either by voluntary agreement or by court
order - see [ our document on repossession
](/en/housing/losing_your_home/home_repossession.html) . Even [ if court
proceedings are started ](https://mabs.ie/abhaile/about-abhaile/what-if-your-
lender-takes-you-to-court/) , the lender must still try to maintain contact
with you to seek an agreement on repayments, and must put legal proceedings on
hold if agreement is reached.

The lender must explain to you that, if the property is sold and the sale
price does not cover the amount you owe, you are still liable for the rest of
the amount you owe.

If your property is repossessed and sold, the lender must write to you
promptly with the following information:

  * Balance outstanding on your mortgage loan account 
  * Details and amount of any costs arising from the disposal which have been added to the account 
  * Interest rate to be charged on the remaining balance 
