##  Can I apply to have the notification requirements cancelled?

Anyone subject to the requirements for a period of 12 years (or 6 years in the
case of someone under 18 years of age) can apply to the court for an order
discharging them from having to notify the Gardaí on the grounds that the
interests of the common good is not being served by you being obliged to
continue to notify. The application can be made once 8 years (or 4 years in
the case of someone under 18 years of age) has passed.

You should apply to the court which imposed the prison sentence originally.
The application may be made by you or by a [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) on your behalf. Court staff will assist
in making the application if you have any difficulties. There is no charge for
an application.

Anyone applying to the court is allowed to bring forward any witness to the
court who will give evidence on their behalf or in regard to their character,
for example, a doctor who had treated you or the director of a drugs
rehabilitation programme which you attended.

If you intend to apply to the court for a discharge of the requirements to
report to the Gardaí, you must notify the Superintendent of the local Garda
station of your intention to make an application to the court.

Anyone subject to requirements for a period of 7 years or less (or 3½ years in
the case of someone under 18 years of age) cannot apply to have the
requirements cancelled.

_**Page edited:** 23 September 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Drug%20Offenders%20Register&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Drug%20Offenders%20Register&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
