##  Maintenance and the Working Family Payment

If you are a separated parent, you can apply for WFP if you meet the
qualifying conditions and:

  * You are living with the children **or**
  * You are _wholly_ _maintaining_ your ex-spouse, ex-civil partner, or ex-cohabitant with whom the children are living 

_Wholly_ _maintaining_ means that the maintenance paid by you, the WFP
applicant, must be the main income of your ex-spouse, ex-civil partner or ex-
cohabitant. Your ex-spouse or ex-partner cannot have more than €100 a week
income in their own right, and they cannot be married, in a civil partnership
or cohabiting.

WFP is awarded to you for 52 weeks. This means that an ex-partner who is
included in your WFP claim cannot get WFP in their own right, or be included
in another person’s WFP claim, during that 52-week period.

**Paying maintenance**

If you are a separated parent and paying maintenance, you may qualify for WFP.
To qualify, you must be wholly maintaining the parent who the children are
living with. Because only one payment can be made for a family, the parent you
are paying maintenance to must not be getting WFP. You must provide written
evidence from this person to show that they are getting maintenance from you.

If you are paying maintenance for a second family because of a court order or
a legally binding agreement, the amount of that maintenance payment will not
be deducted from the income to be assessed for WFP.

**Getting maintenance**

Maintenance for you is assessed in the means test for WFP (maintenance
payments for a child is not assessed). If you are getting maintenance from
more than one person, all the payments are added together and the total is
assessed as your means.

Some of the maintenance payment that you spend on housing will not be counted
as income for the WFP means test. Your housing costs (your rent or mortgage
repayment) up to a maximum of €95.23 per week can be offset against
maintenance payments. Half the balance is then assessed as means. You must
provide proof of rent or mortgage payments.

You can only use ( _offset_ ) your housing costs in this way for maintenance
payments if you have not already used them in a means test for another social
welfare payment.

Non-cash benefits are not assessed as means. For example, if your rent or
mortgage payments are made by an ex-spouse or ex-partner under a maintenance
agreement, it is not assessed.

You can get more information on [ how maintenance is assessed as means
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/) .
