###  PRSI (social insurance) contributions

Adoptive Benefit is paid to a parent who has a certain number of paid PRSI
contributions and who is in insurable employment up to the first day of their
adoptive leave.

If a couple are adopting a child, only one parent can apply for Adoptive
Benefit and adoptive leave. Only the social insurance (PRSI) contributions of
the parent applying for Adoptive Benefit are used.

Your PRSI contributions can be from employment or self-employment. The PRSI
classes that count for Adoptive Benefit are A, E, H and S

Members of the Defence Forces who pay PRSI at Class H are insured for Adoptive
Benefit, but it is not paid while they are in service.

Time spent on the [ COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP) ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-payment/) and the [
COVID-19 Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) ](/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-scheme/) are treated as if you
continued to make insurance contributions at your normal social insurance
class.

**Number of PRSI contributions you need**

If you are employed, to qualify for Adoptive Benefit you must be in insurable
employment immediately before the first day of your adoptive leave and have at
least:

  * 39 weeks PRSI paid in the 12-month period before the adoption date of your child 

Or

  * 39 weeks PRSI paid since first starting work and at least 39 weeks PRSI paid or credited in the relevant tax year or in the year after the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022 and the tax year after the relevant tax year is 2023. 

Or

  * 26 weeks PRSI paid in the relevant tax year and at least 26 weeks PRSI paid in the tax year before the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022 and the tax year before the relevant tax year is 2021. 

If you do not meet these PRSI conditions and you were self-employed before
starting work as an employee, you might meet the contribution conditions for
the self-employed in the relevant tax year – see below.

**If you are self-employed** , you must have:

  * 52 PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the relevant tax year 

Or

  * 52 PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the tax year before the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the tax year before the relevant tax year is 2021. 

Or

  * 52 qualifying PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the tax year after relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the tax year after the relevant tax year is 2023. 

If you do not meet these PRSI conditions and you were in insurable employment
before becoming self-employed, you might meet the contribution conditions for
employees in the relevant tax year – see PRSI conditions for employees above.

PRSI Class S contributions for a particular year are not awarded until you
have paid tax due for that year. To qualify for Adoptive Benefit, your income
tax and PRSI liabilities (importantly for the relevant tax year) must be paid.

**If you worked in another country**

If you were employed in the UK or a country covered by EU Regulations and you
have paid at least one full-rate PRSI contribution in Ireland, you can [
combine your insurance record in that country with your Irish PRSI
contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-
social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) to help
you qualify for Adoptive Benefit. To do this, you must be in insurable
employment in Ireland currently and have paid your most recent PRSI
contribution in Ireland.
