##  Budget changes

**Budget 2024**

Tax on tobacco products increased from 11 October 2023. A packet of 20
cigarettes increased by 75 cent (including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on
other tobacco products.

**Budget 2023**

Tax on tobacco products increased from 28 September 2022. A packet of 20
cigarettes increased by 50 cent (including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on
other tobacco products.

**Budget 2022**

Tax on tobacco products increased from 13 October 2021. A packet of 20
cigarettes increased by 50 cent (including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on
other tobacco products.

**Budget 2021**

From midnight on 13 October 2020, the excise duty on a packet of 20 cigarettes
increased by 50 cent (including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on other tobacco
products.

**Budget 2020**

From midnight on 8 October 2019, the excise duty on a packet of 20 cigarettes
increased by 50 cent (including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on other tobacco
products.

**Budget 2019**

From midnight on 9 October 2018, the excise duty on a packet of 20 cigarettes
was increased by 50 cent (including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on other
tobacco products. There was an additional 25 cent on roll-your-own tobacco.

There was an increase in the minimum excise duty on tobacco products, so that
all cigarettes sold below €11 have the same excise applied as those sold at
€11 and above.

The duty on bets placed by customers in the State increased from 1% to 2% for
bookmakers, and from 15% to 25% on the commissions earned by betting
intermediaries.

**Budget 2018**

The excise duty on a packet of 20 cigarettes was increased by 50 cent
(including VAT) with a pro-rata increase on other tobacco products, and an
additional 25 cent on roll-your-own tobacco with effect from midnight on 10
October 2017.

A new Sugar Sweetened Drinks Tax (SSDT) was announced. The SSDT is an excise
duty on sugar-sweetened drinks. The supplier making the first supply of sugar-
sweetened drinks in the State is liable for the tax.

There are 2 rates of tax depending on the total sugar content of the drinks.
Drinks with a total sugar content of less than 5 grams per 100ml are not
taxed. Once VAT is applied, a rate of 20 cent per litre applies to drinks with
a total sugar content of between 5 and 8 grams per 100ml while a rate of 30
cent per litre applies to drinks with a total sugar content of over 8 grams
per 100ml.

[ You can read more about the SSDT on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/companies-and-charities/excise-and-licences/sugar-
sweetened-drinks-tax/index.aspx) .

_**Page edited:** 16 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/duties-and-vat/excise-duties/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Excise%20duties&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/duties-and-vat/excise-duties/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/duties-and-vat/excise-duties/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Excise%20duties&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/duties-and-vat/excise-duties/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
