##  Complaints

If you have any problems with an insurer, you should first take this up with
the customer service department of the insurer (or your broker/agent if you
are using one). The [ Central Bank of Ireland ](/en/consumer/financial-
products/your-rights-when-buying-financial-products/) enforces the [ Consumer
Protection Code ](https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/consumer-
protection/consumer-protection-codes-regulations#unofficial-consolidation) for
financial services providers (including insurers and intermediaries). The code
sets out how they deal with their customers.

If you are not satisfied with how a financial services provider is dealing
with you, or you believe that they are not following the principles or rules
of the Code, you should first complain to the provider. Under the Code,
financial services providers must have a complaints procedure in place and
must handle your complaint speedily, efficiently and fairly. There are
detailed rules in the Code about how often a firm should contact you to keep
you updated on your complaint. You can read more about the rules around how
firms must handle complaints in the Central Bank of Ireland's [ consumer guide
to the Code (pdf) ](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-
source/regulation/industry-market-sectors/brokers-retail-
intermediaries/guidance/consumer-protection-code-v4.pdf) .

If you cannot resolve your problem or if you are not satisfied with how your
complaint is being handled, you can take your complaint to the [ Financial
Services and Pensions Ombudsman ](https://www.fspo.ie/) . The Ombudsman is an
independent, statutory body that can investigate your complaint.

[ Insurance Ireland ](http://www.insuranceireland.eu/) provides consumer
information and [ a free Insurance Information Service (IIS)
](http://www.insuranceireland.eu/consumer-information/insurance-information-
service) for members of the public. The IIS can help you if you want
information about insurance, or if you need help in resolving a problem with
your insurance company. This service will also investigate complaints that
fall outside the scope of the Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman.

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission gives information and
advice about [ making insurance claims
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/making-an-insurance-claim/)
and [ complaints about financial service providers
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/how-to-complain/complaints-about-financial-
services-providers/) .
