###  Pregnancy and birth

If you are pregnant, your first step is to visit your family doctor (GP) and
your doctor will confirm your pregnancy. They can also explain the [ different
types of maternity services ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-
is-born/maternity-services-in-ireland/) available.

If this is an [ unplanned pregnancy ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-pregnancy/) , [ My Options
](http://www.positiveoptions.ie) is a HSE freephone helpline and counselling
service that can provide you with information and support on all your options,
including continued pregnancy supports and abortion services. It also has a
24/7 nursing team who provide post-abortion support and advice.

The [ Maternity and Infant Care Scheme ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/) provides
a programme of care to all expectant mothers [ ordinarily resident
](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) in Ireland.
This is usually provided by your GP and a hospital obstetrician, and is known
as 'combined care'. You are entitled to this service even if you do not have a
medical card or GP visit card. Most women in Ireland choose to give birth in
hospital. You can read more about your [ antenatal care options ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/choices-in-antenatal-care/) ,
including [ home birth ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-
born/home-birth/) .

It is very important to look after your health after giving birth. [ Postnatal
care ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/postnatal-care/)
is available for you and your baby. There are services and supports that can
help if you experience [ postnatal depression ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-depression/) .
You can contact your public health nurse or call your GP anytime to discuss
how you are feeling.
