##  Studying in the UK

If you live in Ireland and are thinking of doing a third-level course in
Northern Ireland (NI) or elsewhere in the United Kingdom (UK) there is a wide
range of courses available.

Most UK undergraduate courses last 3 years but in Scotland they last 4 years.
The application process starts earlier than in Ireland. This means you should
begin looking at courses at least 12 months before you plan to start studying.
The application procedure for all UK undergraduate courses is the same.

Before you apply, you should find out about the different structures and costs
for [ third-level education in the UK ](https://www.gov.uk/student-finance) ,
in particular fees and living costs.

The United Kingdom (UK) includes England, Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland. There are [ different fee arrangements for each country within the UK
](http://www.ucas.com/how-it-all-works/student-finance) .

**Common Travel Area**

The [ Common Travel Area (CTA) ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-
uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/) gives Irish and UK citizens
the right to access all levels of education and training in each other’s
state. You must also meet the residency criteria to access financial supports.

You must be resident in Ireland or the UK for 3 years before the start of your
course to be eligible under the CTA. You can find more information in [
Student finance: how you’re assessed and paid 2023 to 2024
](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/student-finance-how-youre-
assessed-and-paid/student-finance-how-youre-assessed-and-paid-2023-to-2024) .

If you are an Irish citizen student and meet the residency criteria, you can
study in the UK for the [ same rate of fees as British students
](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/student-finance-how-youre-
assessed-and-paid/student-finance-how-youre-assessed-and-paid-2023-to-2024) in
the UK and may be eligible for a maintenance grant under the Irish [ Student
Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-
third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) \- see below.
