##  Paying and reclaiming your deposit

You will probably have to pay a security deposit when you agree to rent a
property. The landlord holds this deposit as security to cover any rent
arrears, bills owing or damage beyond normal wear and tear at the end of the
tenancy.

You cannot be forced to make upfront payments of more than 2 month’s rent.
This includes a deposit of a month’s rent and one month’s rent in advance.
This restriction applies to all tenancies created from 9 August 2021 and is
set out in the [ Residential Tenancies (No. 2) Act 2021
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2021/act/17/enacted/en/html) . Students
in student-specific tenancies can opt-out of this restriction and pay a larger
upfront payment if they want. However, this opt-out is only allowed if the
student is paying rent and tuition to the same provider, such as a public or
private educational provider.

Threshold provides [ useful tips ](https://threshold.ie/faq/setting-up-a-
tenancy/) on what to consider before you pay a deposit, including information
on [ how to spot a scam ](https://threshold.ie/faq/how-to-spot-a-scam/) . Your
landlord must give you an inventory of the contents of the property. You
should keep a record of the condition of everything that is listed, taking
photos if possible, and agree this in writing with your landlord.

When you leave a property at the end of the agreed rental period or after
giving the agreed notice, the landlord must return your security deposit,
promptly and in full. Read [ Threshold’s advice on getting your deposit back
](http://www.threshold.ie/advice/ending-a-tenancy/how-to-get-your-deposit-
back/) .

However, if you leave before the end of the agreed period, the landlord may
keep your deposit, even if you have given notice. (You may also be liable for
the amount of rent due until the end of the lease, depending on what is stated
in the lease agreement.)

The landlord may keep part or all of the deposit in the following situations:

  * Rent arrears 
  * Unpaid bills 
  * Damage above normal [ wear and tear ](https://www.rtb.ie/during-a-tenancy/wear-and-tear)
  * If you have not given enough notice 

The landlord cannot hold your possessions against money you owe, but they can
apply to the RTB if they feel that your deposit does not cover rent arrears or
the cost of damage to the property.

The [ Residential Tenancies (Amendment) Act 2015
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/act/14/enacted/en/html) provides
for a [ tenancy deposit protection scheme,
](https://www.kildarestreet.com/wrans/?id=2018-06-26a.1517) where the RTB
would manage and hold deposits for tenants and landlords. These provisions are
not yet in effect.
