##  Legal developments in the regulation of surrogacy

It has long been recommended that a child born through surrogacy should be
presumed to be the child of the commissioning couple, rather than the
surrogate mother. This was set out in the [ Report of the Commission on
Assisted Human Reproduction (2005) (pdf) ](http://health.gov.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/Report-of-The-Commission-on-Assisted-Human-
Reproduction.pdf) . The Commission also recommended that a regulatory body be
set up for assisted human reproduction, including surrogacy.

The Assisted Human Reproduction Bill was first published in 2017 and it
contained proposals to regulate many aspects of assisted human reproduction
and domestic surrogacy.

The Joint Oireachtas Health Committee undertook pre-legislative scrutiny of
the General Scheme of the Assisted Human Reproduction Bill and, in 2019,
issued its [ report with recommendations for improvement of the legislation
(pdf)
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/joint_committee_on_health/reports/2019/2019-07-10_report-
on-pre-legislative-scrutiny-of-the-general-scheme-of-the-assisted-human-
reproduction-bill_en.pdf) .

In April 2021, the [ Review of Children’s Rights and Best Interests in the
Context of Donor Assisted Human Reproduction and Surrogacy in Irish Law
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/3e601-a-review-of-childrens-rights-and-
best-interests-in-the-context-of-donorassisted-human-reproa-review-of-
childrens-rights-and-best-interests-in-the-context-of-donor-assisted-human-
reproduction-and-surrogacy-in-irish-law-duction-and-surrogacy-in-irish-law/)
was published. The review made many recommendations, including that
comprehensive legislation regulating surrogacy be enacted in Ireland at the
earliest opportunity.

On 10 March 2022, the [ Health (Assisted Human Reproduction) Bill 2022
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2022/29/) was published. On 29 May
2024, the Bill was passed by the Dáil and it now proceeds to Second Stage in
the Seanad.

The main purposes of the Bill are to:

  * Put in place a specific regulatory framework for the for the provision of assisted human reproduction (AHR) treatment and related research 
  * Allow for the establishment of the Assisted Human Reproduction Regulatory Authority (AHRRA) 
  * Set out criteria for the provision of AHR treatments including posthumous assisted human reproduction and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis 
  * Set out the circumstances under which surrogacy may be permitted in Ireland, including that the surrogacy agreement is gestational only (that is, the surrogate’s egg is not used) 
  * Ensure that any child born will have a genetic link to at least one intending parent 

Under the Bill, any surrogacy agreement must also be non-commercial
(altruistic) and approved by the AHRRA in advance.

On 26 June 2024, the [ Health (Assisted Human Reproduction) Bill 2022 (pdf)
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/bill/2022/29/eng/ver_b/b29b22d.pdf)
was passed by both Houses of the Oireachtas. The legislation needs to be
commenced to come into effect.
