###  Step 1: Calculate your total income

Weekly net household income from employment - see Note 1 below____________

**Add** net weekly household income from  
self-employment - see Note 2 below ____________

**Add** social welfare payments - see Note 3 below ____________

**Add** income from occupational pensions ____________

**Add** income from maintenance - see Note 4 below ____________

**Total Family Income** = ___________

**Note 1**

Weekly household income from employment is your weekly income from employment
and your spouse’s, civil partner's or cohabitant's weekly income from
employment.

Net earnings for WFP purposes is gross pay minus [ tax
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/) , [
PRSI ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) , [ Universal
Social Charge ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) and superannuation.

If a dependent child has income from employment, it is not taken into account.

**Note 2**

Net weekly household income from self-employment includes the net weekly
income from self-employment of both you and your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant.

If a dependent child has income from self-employment, it is not taken into
account.

**Note 3**

Income from some social welfare payments are taken into account. All income
from carer's payments are taken into account.

However, the following payments **are not** taken into account:

  * [ Child Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/child-benefit/)
  * [ Guardian’s Payment (Non-Contributory) and Guardian’s Payment (Contributory) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/)
  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/)
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
  * [ Domiciliary Care Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/)
  * [ Foster Child Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/#60a83b)
  * [ Rent Supplement ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/)

**Note 4**

All income from maintenance is assessed, **except maintenance payments for a
child** . If you are getting maintenance from more than one person, all the
payments are added together, and the total is assessed as means.

Your housing costs (your rent or mortgage repayment) up to a maximum of €95.23
per week can be offset against maintenance payments. Half the balance is then
assessed as means. You cannot offset your housing costs against maintenance
payments for WFP, if you have already done so in the means test for another
social welfare payment.

Non-cash benefits are not assessed as means. For example, if your rent or
mortgage payments are made by an ex-spouse or partner under a maintenance
agreement, it is not assessed.

Only one Working Family Payment can be made in respect of any family – the
parent from whom you are getting maintenance must not be getting WFP.
