###  Find a property you like and can afford

Property websites, auctioneers and estate agents are the main ways to find
properties that are for sale. You can find a [ public register of auctioneers
and estate agents ](https://www.psr.ie/psra-registers/register-of-licensed-
property-services-providers/) on theProperty Services Regulatory Authority's
website.

Sometimes individual sellers advertise property themselves. Newspapers may
also have property supplements or publish advertisements about properties for
sale.

The Property Services Regulatory Authority publishes a [ Residential Property
Price Register ](https://www.propertypriceregister.ie/) , which contains
information on residential properties bought in Ireland since 1 January 2010.
You can check the register to see how much was paid for a property. This can
be useful to find out the price properties have sold for in the area you are
looking to buy.

All homes for sale must have a [ Building Energy Rating (BER)
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-
your-home/) . A BER will tell you how energy-efficient the home is. It will
help you make an informed choice when comparing properties.

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommends that you check whether
the home is in a High Radon Area on its [ Radon Risk Map
](http://www.epa.ie/radiation) and enquire about if it has been tested for
radon. More information on radon in homes is available from the [ EPA
](http://www.epa.ie) and in our page on [ measurement of radon levels
](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/radon-in-buildings/) .

The CCPC has a checklist of what to consider when [ Looking for a property
(pdf) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2017/07/Buying-a-home-checklist-1-looking-around.pdf)
, and another checklist with questions you can ask to [ Find out more about a
property (pdf) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2017/07/Buying-a-home-checklist-2-finding-out-
more.pdf) , if you are particularly interested in a property.
