##  Admission of students with a disability or with special educational needs

Schools cannot discriminate based on a child having a disability or a special
educational need. In theory, this means that you should be able to apply to
any school and that school should be able to accommodate your child. However,
in practice, some schools do not have the facilities to accept students with
severe special needs.

If you prefer your child to attend a special school or a special class in a
school that caters for specific types of disabilities the selection criteria
above apply.

If the school you are applying to is a ‘special school’, it can refuse to
admit your child if they do not have the specified category of special need
concerned. The school must state this in its admission notice.

If you are applying for your child to enter a ‘special class’ in a school that
was established to provide exclusively for students with certain categories of
special needs, the school can refuse to admit your child to that class if they
do not have the specified category of special need concerned. The school must
state this in its admission notice.

**What if I can’t find an appropriate school for my child with special
needs?**

Some schools do not have the facilities to accept students with severe special
needs. If there is no school in your area with facilities for your child, the
[ National Council for Special Education (NCSE) ](https://ncse.ie/for-parents)
or [ Tusla – the Child and Family Agency
](http://www.tusla.ie/services/educational-welfare-services) can help you.
They can designate a school in your area for your child and that [ school must
make additional provisions ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/8a499-statement-from-minister-of-state-for-special-education-and-
inclusion-josepha-madigan-td-announcing-significant-increase-in-special-
education-provision-in-dublin/) for your child to attend.

The [ Education (Provision in Respect of Children with Special Educational
Needs) Act 2022
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/act/2022/22/eng/enacted/a2222.pdf)
makes additional provision for children with special educational needs. The
Department of Education has published information for schools about p [
roviding for children with special education needs
](https://assets.gov.ie/240372/f025d1bf-0cb9-44cb-9eed-b4d092fc9158.pdf) .
