##  Credit cards and charge cards

A credit card is issued by a financial institution that allows you to buy
goods, services or cash up to a certain credit limit. You then pay the credit
card company for the amount of the total transactions on the card. Interest is
charged on any outstanding balance each month.

A charge card can be used like a credit card except no interest is charged
since balances are paid by you at the end of each month.

The stamp duty is payable annually as follows:

  * Credit cards: €30 
  * Charge cards: €30 

For credit cards, the charge is for each account. You can have additional
cards issued on an account without paying extra duty. For charge cards, the
charge is per card.

From 2024, the stamp duty applies to each tax year, 1 January to 31 December.
Previously, the stamp duty applied to the year up to 1 April. In 2023, a
reduced charge of €22.50 was applied for the shorter period 2 April 2023 to 31
December 2023.

If the credit card account is closed and has never been used, no stamp duty is
payable, provided that you close the account in the same period as it was
opened. If you don't close the account in the period it was opened, you will
be charged stamp duty on it even if it has never been used. If you have used
your card and you close your account during the year, you will be charged
stamp duty on closure.

If you are changing to a different credit card account, you don’t have to pay
the duty again for that year. When you are closing the account your card
issuer will give you a letter of closure stating that you have paid your stamp
duty for the year. If you give this letter to your new card issuer, you will
not be charged stamp duty by them for that year. You can change account as
often as you like during the year without paying extra duty, once you transfer
a letter of closure between the card issuers each time.

You are not liable to stamp duty if your billing address is outside the State
for the entire tax year.
