##  How are social homes allocated?

In general, as houses and apartments become available, they are allocated from
the housing list in order of priority. However, local authorities can also
allocate a portion of their social housing using a system of _choice-based
letting_ , see below.

When the local authority is planning to offer you accommodation, it must
review its assessment of your household’s eligibility and need for social
housing. It must also confirm that your application is still valid, for
example, it will check that you still have a connection with the area.

If you have chosen to be considered for accommodation provided by a [ housing
association or other approved housing body
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) (by ticking the 'approved housing body
(AHB)' box on the social housing application form) one of these organisations
may contact you if suitable accommodation becomes available.

**Can I refuse an offer of a home?**

If you are offered a house or apartment that you do not want, you can refuse
it without affecting your place on the housing list. However, if the local
authority thinks that you do not have a good reason for refusing the offer, it
may reduce your priority on the list.

If you refuse more than one reasonable offer in any 12-month period, you will
be suspended from the list for 12 months, during which you cannot claim Rent
Supplement.

**What is choice based letting?**

Local authorities can allocate some of their social housing using a different
system called Choice Based Letting (CBL). This is an online system which lets
local authorities advertise some of their social housing so approved social
housing applicants can express their interest in the available properties.

Not all local authorities us the CBL system. If they do, they will advertise
CBL properties online when they are available. The properties can be viewed on
the local authority’s website. They may also be advertised in the media.

The advertisements include information about:

  * The location of the home 
  * The type of home, for example, a two-bedroom apartment 
  * The type of household that can apply for the home, for example, a single-person household 
  * The floor plan or photographs of the home 
  * The house rules 
  * The closing date for expressing your interest in the property (this is usually a few weeks) 

Local authorities can restrict CBL applications to qualified people who
selected the location of the advertised property as an area of choice on their
social housing application. The property advertisement will state if this
restriction applies.

If you want to express your interest in a CBL property, the advertisement will
provide information about how to apply. You can also contact your [ local
authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for
information.

If a number of qualified people express an interest in a CBL home, the home
will be allocated in line with the local authorities’ allocation scheme.

If you are offered a house or apartment under the CBL system and you refuse
it, you will not be able to apply for a CBL property for 12 months. This will
not affect your position on the housing list.

For more information about choice-based letting contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

**Can my local authority refuse to allocate me a house?**

If you or a member of your household has previously been in local authority
housing, the housing authority will not allocate housing to you if you or a
household member have:

  * Damaged a property previously provided by a housing authority, without repairing the property or paying for repairs 
  * Breached the terms of a local authority tenancy agreement, leading to the authority ending the tenancy 
  * Built up rent arrears for 12 weeks or more in any period of 3 years as a local authority tenant, without either paying them off or arranging to pay them 

However, in exceptional circumstances local authorities can consider providing
social housing support to households in the first two situations outlined
above. This is outlined in the [ Social Housing Assessment (Amendment) (No. 2)
Regulations 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2011/si/321/made/en/print) .
