##  Previous measures

[ Measures to delay the spread of the virus taken on 12 March 2020
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/96eb4c-statement-from-the-national-
public-health-emergency-team/) included closing schools, colleges, childcare
facilities and state-run cultural institutions. [ Hospital visits were
restricted. ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/hospital-service-
disruptions/hospital-service-disruptions-covid19.html) Pubs were advised to
close. These measures were extended, along with [ further measures announced
on 24 March 2020 ](https://merrionstreet.ie/en/News-
Room/Speeches/Post_Cabinet_Statement_An_Taoiseach_Leo_Varadkar_24_March_2020.html)
.

The Government announced the [ Roadmap for reopening society and business
(pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/73722/ffd17d70fbb64b498fd809dde548f411.pdf) on 1
May 2020.

On 2 September 2020, the [ Resilience and Recovery 2020–2021: Plan for Living
with COVID-19 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/87128/0d3f8c17-2c95-40c3-9311-e3fbb2c0fae5.pdf) was
published. This included a plan to manage COVID-19 using different levels.

On 23 February 2021, a revised plan to manage COVID-19 was published called [
Resilience and Recovery: The Path Ahead (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/124440/a3fa7c2b-9ee4-492a-b0c0-ed3374fb1729.pdf) . A [
re-opening plan for May and June ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/0bd80-new-public-health-measures-announced-the-path-
ahead/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/81029-government-announces-
phased-easing-of-public-health-restrictions/) was announced on 29 April 2021.
A further easing of restrictions for June, July and August was [ announced on
28 May 2021 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/7894b-post-cabinet-
statement-resilience-and-recovery-the-path-ahead/) .

The ' [ Reframing the Challenge, Continuing Our Recovery and Reconnecting
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/3361b-public-health-updates/) ’ plan was
announced on 31 August 2021. This included a plan for phased easing of
restrictions during September and October.

On 3 December, [ the Government reintroduced restrictions
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/4e373-covid-19-reframing-the-challenge-
continuing-our-recovery-and-reconnecting/) , including all nightclubs to close
until 9 January 2022. [ Further restrictions were announced on 17 December
2021 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/4174f-new-public-health-measures-
announced-friday-17-december/) , including an 8pm closing time for bars,
restaurants, live events, cinemas and theatres until 30 January 2022.

On 22 January 2022, [ the Government removed most COVID-19 restrictions
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/0fc0d-government-announces-that-most-of-
the-public-health-measures-currently-in-place-can-be-removed/) . Face masks
and protective measures in schools remain in place until 28 February 2022.

On [ 22 February 2022, the Government announced ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/60083-covid-19-reframing-the-challenge-continuing-our-recovery-
reconnecting/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/0fc0d-government-
announces-that-most-of-the-public-health-measures-currently-in-place-can-be-
removed/) that protective measures in schools (such as pods and social
distancing) and the mandatory requirement for face masks will end on 28
February 2022.

On 31 March 2022 the [ Health (Preservation and Protection and Other Emergency
Measures in the Public Interest) Act 2020
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/act/1/enacted/en/html) ended. This
gave the Minister for Health the power to make regulations and introduce
measures to slow down the spread of the virus. It also allowed for the
detention of someone who was a potential source of infection and risk to
public health, if it was necessary to slow the spread of COVID-19. During the
COVID-19 pandemic various regulations gave An Garda Síochána additional
powers, including arrest without warrant. Offences were punishable by a fine
of up to €5,000, up to six months imprisonment, or a combination of both.

_**Page edited:** 20 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/public-
health-measures-for-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Public%20health%20measures%20for%20COVID-19&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/public-
health-measures-for-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/public-
health-measures-for-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Public%20health%20measures%20for%20COVID-19&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/public-
health-measures-for-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
