###  Appeals

In general, because LPT is a self-assessed tax, formal appeals only arise in a
small number of situations.

If you do not agree with a Revenue estimate you can replace it by submitting a
return with your own self-assessment.

Since Revenue has compiled a register of residential properties from various
sources, there may be errors about ownership of some properties. If you got a
LPT return form and you do not think you are liable for that property you
should [ contact Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-
service-contact/lpt-vht.aspx) within 30 days of getting the letter. You should
include an explanation of why you are not liable, the details who you think is
the liable person (name, address, and PPS Number) and supporting
documentation. It is important that you contact Revenue because if the error
is not corrected you are liable to pay the tax. Revenue will use the
information you supply to make a decision on whether you are a liable person.
If you do not agree you can appeal this decision to the [ Tax Appeal
Commission. ](https://www.taxappeals.ie/)

Appeals relating to the valuation of properties are decided by the Land Values
Reference Committee.

If you disagree with Revenue on other matters (for example, whether the
property is residential or whether you can defer payment) and the matter
cannot be resolved, Revenue will issue a formal Notice of Assessment or a
formal decision on the matter to you. Your right to appeal to the Appeal
Commissioners will be set out clearly on the notices. However, you must make a
return and pay any tax due before you can appeal the Notice of Assessment or
any other Revenue decision.
