##  Legislation

The main legislation dealing with road safety is the [ Road Traffic Act 1961
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1961/act/24/enacted/en/html) . This law
has been updated and modernised regularly over the years and following the
introduction of the [ Road Traffic Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/23/enacted/en/html) the Gardaí
have wide powers to reduce and eliminate the offence of drink driving.

The introduction of the 2006 Road Traffic Act gave the Gardaí the power to
breathalyse any driver stopped at a mandatory alcohol checkpoint without the
need to form any opinion in relation to the driver of the vehicle. The ability
to breathalyse any driver is commonly known as _random breath testing_ .

Under the [ Road Traffic Act (No.2) 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2011/en/act/pub/0007/index.html) , Gardaí
must conduct a preliminary breath test where they believe a driver has
consumed alcohol or at the scene of a crash where someone has been injured and
requires medical attention.

Under the [ Road Traffic Act 2014
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2014/en/act/pub/0003/index.html) , it is
possible to take a specimen of blood from a driver who is incapacitated
following a serious road traffic collision and to test that specimen for
intoxicants. The driver is asked, on regaining capacity, whether they consent
to the issuing of a certificate of the test result based on the specimen.
Refusal is an offence.

Under the [ Road Traffic Act 2016
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2016/act/21/enacted/en/) , Gardaí can
conduct preliminary drug tests at the roadside or in Garda stations.

Under the [ Road Traffic Act 2024
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/act/10/section/12/enacted/en/html#part4)
, Gardaí must conduct mandatory drug tests of drivers involved in serious
collisions at the roadside.

Since 26 October 2018, under the [ Road Traffic (Amendment) Act 2018
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/act/18/) , drivers who previously
got 3 penalty points for certain drink driving offences will now be [
disqualified from driving ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-
offences/being-disqualified-from-driving/) for 3 months instead.
