##  How to get a safety or barring order

How you apply for a domestic violence protection order depends on the type of
protection you are applying for.

The Courts Service has a [ step-by-step guide to the steps for applying for a
domestic violence order ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/domestic-
violence/how-to-apply-for-a-domestic-violence-order) from the District Court.
Most applications for domestic violence protection orders are made in the
District Court.

You can hire a solicitor to make an application on your behalf or you can make
the application yourself. You may be entitled to [ legal aid
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) .

Go to [ your local District Court Office ](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-
us) . The District Court Office staff will tell you the forms you need to make
your application. If you are applying for a barring order or a safety order,
the court clerk will arrange a court date for a court hearing. You will be
given your summons for the court hearing at the time of your application. The
forms will be sent to the respondent (the person accused of the violent or
abusive behaviour) so that they can attend in court on the day of the hearing.
You do not need a solicitor to make an application, but it is recommended that
you have legal representation for a full court hearing.

The decision of the court is produced in the form of a written document called
an 'order'. If the respondent is in court when the order is made the
respondent is considered to be notified and it is sent by the court office to
the respondent by ordinary post. However, in the case of a protection order,
interim barring order or emergency barring order the court usually directs
that order be served on the respondent by a member of the Gardaí.

The court office will notify the Gardaí of the making of the order by sending
a copy to the local Garda station by post. To avoid any delay in notifying the
Gardaí you should call to the Garda station immediately after the order has
been made, tell them of the making of the order and leave a copy with them
(you can allow them to take a photocopy). A copy of your order will be sent to
the superintendent of your local Garda station by registered post the
following day.
