##  Support services

If you are concerned about domestic violence or abuse in your home, you should
contact [ your local Garda station ](https://www.garda.ie/en/Contact-
Us/Station-Directory/) . Members of the Gardaí are specially trained to deal
with these situations and can offer advice, information and assistance. **If
you feel in immediate danger, call 112 or 999.**

You can go to a [ Sexual Assault Treament Unit ](https://www2.hse.ie/sexual-
assault-treatment-units/) for immediate medical care following a sexual
assault. You do not need a referral but you should call [ your local unit
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/sexual-assault-treatment-units/where-to-
find.html) before you arrive. These services are free and available 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week.

**Women's Aid**

Women’s Aid provide free and confidential support to women experiencing
domestic violence, family and friends, and professionals supporting victims of
abuse. Supports available include:

  * **National Freephone Helpline** 1800 341 900 available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
  * **Telephone Interpretation Service** on 1800 341 900 available 8am – 8pm, 7 days a week 
  * An **online chat service** available 7 nights a week, 7pm – 10pm at [ womensaid.ie ](https://www.womensaid.ie/) . Also Monday to Friday, 10am – 1pm and Saturday, 12pm – 3pm and Sunday, 11am – 1pm. 
  * **Text service** **for Deaf and Hard of Hearing women** available 7 days a week on 087 959 7980 
  * A **drop-in service** is available in Dolphin House Family Law Court in Dublin, Monday to Friday, 9.30am – 12.30pm and 2pm - 4.30pm.. 

**Rape Crisis Centres**

The [ National Sexual Violence Helpline
](https://www.drcc.ie/services/helpline/) (also known as the National Rape
Crisis Helpline) offers a free, confidential listening and support service for
people who have been raped, sexually assaulted, sexually harassed or sexually
abused at any time in their lives. Advice and referral to other services will
also be provided.

Support is available in more than 240 languages through the [ helpline
interpreting service ](https://www.drcc.ie/services/helpline/interpreting-
service/) .

  * **National Sexual Violence Helpline:** 1800 778 888, available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
  * **Helpline interpreting service** : 1800 778 888, available Monday – Friday, 8am – 6.30pm 
  * **Text service for people who are deaf and hard of hearing:** 086 823 8443, available Monday – Friday, 8am – 6.30pm 
  * [ Online webchat ](https://www.drcc.ie/services/helpline/webchat/) on the Dublin Rape Crisis Centre website, available Monday to Friday, 10am – 5pm, and also from midnight to 3am on Tuesdays and Wednesdays 
  * [ Rape Crisis Help ](https://www.rapecrisishelp.ie/) website with information for victims of sexual violence and a list of [ local Rape Crisis Centres ](https://www.rapecrisishelp.ie/how-we-can-help/rape-crisis-centres-services-during-covid-19/)

[ Finding Your Way after Sexual Violence ](https://www.drcc.ie/fyw) is an
online guide to the options and supports available after rape, sexual assault
and other forms of sexual violence. The guide has information on accessing a [
Sexual Assault Treatment Unit ](https://www2.hse.ie/sexual-assault-treatment-
units/) , reporting to the Gardaí, and where to go for help.

**Safe Ireland**

Safe Ireland has up-to-date [ information on the location of local domestic
violence support services and refuges ](https://www.safeireland.ie/get-
help/where-to-find-help/) in Ireland and their contact details.

**Men's Development Network**

The Men’s Development Network operates the [ National Male Advice Line
](https://mensnetwork.ie/) on 1800 816 588 for men experiencing, or who have
experienced, domestic violence. It is available 7 days a week, Monday and
Wednesday 10am – 6pm, Tuesday and Thursday 12pm – 8pm, Friday to Sunday, 2pm –
6pm.

**Men's Aid**

[ Men’s Aid Ireland ](https://www.mensaid.ie/contact-us/) (formerly known as
Amen) provides a confidential helpline, a support service and information for
men and their families experiencing domestic violence.

  * Confidential national support line on (01) 554 3811, 9am – 5pm, Monday to Friday 
  * Email for confidential support at [ hello@mensaid.ie ](mailto:hello@mensaid.ie)

**CARI (Children At Risk in Ireland)**

CARI has a helpline offering specialised support to anyone affected by child
sexual abuse. CARI supports parents, adult survivors, professionals, and the
general public.

  * Call 1890 924 567, Monday to Friday, 9.00am – 5.00pm 
  * You can request a callback by completing a short form on [ Cari.ie ](https://www.cari.ie/helpline/request-a-callback/)

**Stillhere.ie**

The Government has an ongoing public awareness campaign on domestic abuse with
information and advice on the website [ stillhere.ie
](https://www.stillhere.ie/) . It has details of support services for anyone
experiencing domestic abuse or in fear of domestic abuse in their home. It
includes information about:

  * The courts and legal aid 
  * Supports for children 
  * Supports for people with disabilities and older people 
  * Digital and online safety 
