###  Group water schemes

Many households that are not connected to a public water supply are served by
group water schemes. These schemes are formed by two or more households coming
together to provide their own common water supply. The group elects trustees
to act on behalf of its members in all dealings with the local authority.

Usually, group schemes are established in areas where the local authority does
not intend to install a water supply system in the near future, or at all.
Group water schemes can get water supplies from the public mains, if possible,
or from private sources like wells or lakes.

You have to pay for your water if you belong to a private group water scheme.
However, local authorities do provide subsidies for each house in a group
scheme â€“ see 'Grants for wells and group water schemes' below. Local
authorities have the remit to test the water supply and ensure it is safe to
drink but they are not responsible for maintaining group scheme pipes and
filtration systems.

If the members of a group water scheme want the local authority to take over
the running of the scheme, they must sign a waiver to allow local authority
personnel on their land to maintain pipes, etc. The group must give the local
authority a map of the pipe system and give it access to test pipes for
leakage. If the local authority takes over the scheme, it is then responsible
for maintaining the water system. However, if a group water scheme remains
fully private, it may get technical and grant assistance from the local
authority for any necessary upgrading works.

The [ National Federation of Group Water Schemes ](http://www.nfgws.ie/Home)
is a co-operative society, established to represent the interests of members
of group water schemes. It also provides advisory, training, developmental and
other services to scheme members.
