##  Setting down for trial

In general, in actions commenced by plenary or personal injuries summons a [
notice of trial ](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c) (Form [
18 ](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c##Form18) , [ 18A
](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c##Form18A) or [ 19
](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c##Form19) ) is served by
the plaintiff on the defendant and is set down for trial in the Central
Office. At least 21 daysâ€™ notice must be given, unless shorter notice has been
agreed. A motion to set aside the notice of trial must be brought within 4
days of the service of the notice.

If the plaintiff does not give notice of trial within 6 weeks after the close
of the pleadings, or within such extended time as the Court may allow, the
defendant may give notice of trial or may apply to the Court to dismiss the
action for want of prosecution.

Notice of trial is given before setting down the action for trial. If the
action is not set down by either party within 14 days of notice of trial being
served, the notice of trial will no longer be in force.

The party setting down the proceedings for trial does so by delivering to the
Central Office a copy of the notice of trial together with 2 copies of the
whole of the pleadings (and of any letter or notice for particulars and reply
to it), one of which is for the use of the judge at the trial. It may also be
necessary to file a certificate of readiness.

Further information is available in [ Order 36 of the Rules of the Superior
Courts ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/trial) .

When the case is set down for trial, it is assigned to the relevant listing
for the type of case. Information on listing procedures is available [ on the
Courts Service website ](https://www.courts.ie/procedure-high-court) .
