##  Other arrangements for older jobseekers

If you are claiming Jobseeker’s Benefit or [ Jobseeker's Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) and are aged 62
or over, you will no longer be required to engage with the compulsory
activation process (see below) and you will not be subject to penalty rates
for non-engagement. (All other rules for Jobseeker's Benefit or Allowance
still apply.)

However, if you are **already engaged** in activation (selected and referred
for engagement) or if you are **currently taking part** in an activation
programme (such as Community Employment, JobPath or training courses), you are
expected to complete the programme. If you leave activation programmes before
completion, your jobseeker's payment may be reduced.

You can voluntarily avail of a range of supports (for example, training or
employment support programmes) from the Department of Social Protection.

**What is activation?** Labour market activation policies are designed to give
jobseekers a better chance of finding employment. The Department of Social
Protection describes activation as its engagement with jobseekers to support
them back into employment. Jobseekers are expected to fully engage with this
process and use the supports offered during the activation process which might
include education or training schemes, employment support schemes to help them
back into the workplace, internships and other supports.  People who do not
engage with the activation process may have their payment reduced and can
subsequently be disqualified from their payment for up to 9 weeks.  [ Read
more about the conditions that apply to your jobseekers’ payment.
](conditions_for_getting_a_jobseekers_payment.en.html)  
---  
  
In addition, most jobseekers aged 62 or over will be placed on a yearly
signing arrangement with their Intreo Centre or local Social Welfare Branch
Office (this means that they do not need to sign on regularly) and most will
be transferred to Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) payments so payment can be
made directly into their bank account. Certain categories of older jobseekers
may be required to engage more frequently with their Intreo Centre or local
Social Welfare Branch Office. For example, casual jobseekers of 62 and older
must continue to submit weekly dockets of their work patterns.

Note that to qualify for either Jobseeker’s Benefit or Allowance you must be
genuinely seeking work and be available for full-time employment and these
conditions continue to apply to all jobseekers.  

_**Page edited:** 6 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/older-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Older%20people%20and%20jobseeker%27s%20payments&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/older-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/older-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Older%20people%20and%20jobseeker%27s%20payments&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/older-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
