###  1\. If your days at work are reduced (temporarily) - systematic short-
time

If you normally work full-time but short-time working is introduced by your
employer, you may get Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB). Reduced working hours on a
temporary basis is called _systematic short-time working_ .

You will get JB for the days you don't work provided you meet the other
conditions that apply to JB, for example, you cannot work more than 3 days per
week. If you work 4 days, you are no longer entitled to claim JB (because you
must be unemployed for 4 out of 7 days).

For systematic short-time workers the social welfare week is based on 5 days.
This means that days worked and days of unemployment added together cannot be
more than 5.

For example, if your days of work are reduced to 3 days per week, you will get
JB for the other 2 days and you will use up 2 days of your total JB
entitlement. This means you will get 2/5ths of the normal amount of
Jobseeker's Benefit (see table below).

In these circumstances, if you are entitled to 234 days JB (9 months) you
could continue to claim JB for 117 weeks. However, the Department of Social
Protection (DSP) will reassess a systematic short time worker’s JB claim if it
goes on for an extended period. If the DSP decides that it is unlikely you
will return to full-time work with that company in the short term, you will be
reassessed as a part-time worker.

You can read a case study showing you [ how to calculate the length of time a
short time worker can get Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-jobseekers-benefit-
and-systematic-short-time-work/) .

You will continue to pay PRSI in the normal way. However, Jobseeker’s Benefit
is **not taxable** if you are a systematic short-time worker.

**Jobseeker's Benefit for systematic short-time workers**

**Number of days worked** |  **Effective days of unemployment** |  **Weekly payment for a single person** |  **Weekly payment for a couple with 1 child under 12**  
---|---|---|---  
1  |  4  |  €185.60  |  €345.60   
2  |  3  |  €139.20  |  €259.20   
3  |  2  |  €92.80  |  €172.80   
  
If you work 4 days you are no longer entitled to claim JB (because you must be
unemployed for 4 out of 7 days).

If you are a part-time worker and your days of work are reduced temporarily
you are not treated as a systematic short-time worker - you are treated as a
part-time worker (see below).

For example, if your working pattern is reduced from 3 days (Monday, Tuesday
and Wednesday) to 2 days (Monday and Tuesday) per week, you will be paid
Jobseeker's Benefit for 3 days once you satisfy all the conditions.

An employer may initially reduce your workdays on a temporary basis, but if
there is no prospect of returning to full-time work with that employer you
will be reassessed as a part-time worker.
