####  Means test for social insurance payments

Social insurance payments are based on PRSI contributions and so your payment
is not means tested. However if you wish to claim for a dependent their income
will be assessed. An adult dependant's income is assessed for [ social
insurance payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) as follows:

**Employment and self-employment** \- Your spouse's, civil partner's or
cohabitant's average weekly income from employment or self-employment is
assessed (the gross weekly income is assessed, no deductions are allowed for
tax, PRSI contributions or personal expenses). If paid on a monthly basis, the
weekly average income over the previous 2 months is calculated. If he or she
is paid weekly or fortnightly, the weekly average over the previous 6 weeks is
used.

[ Community Employment (CE) ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/) is treated
like work - your adult dependant's gross weekly earnings from CE are assessed.

For self-employment the income received in the last completed tax year is
divided by 52 to get the average weekly income.

**Capital** \- Income from capital, for example, property, savings and
investments, is included in the mean test. If you and your spouse, civil
partner or cohabitant hold capital jointly, half of the value is assessed as
belonging to your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant.

If property is owned jointly or only by your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant the rental income from the property is assessed for payment of an
Increase for a Qualified Adult with your social insurance payment. However,
the capital value will be assessed if the property is not rented.

You can find out more about how capital is valued in the means test in our
document [ Capital and social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-
your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/) .

**Income from other sources** \- Income from other sources includes rental
income from the letting of property, income from an occupational pension,
foreign social welfare payments, income from a trust fund, income under a deed
of covenant, other cash income, etc.,

It is calculated on a weekly basis. Some social welfare payments are not taken
into account as income including Child Benefit, Domiciliary Care Allowance and
Supplementary Welfare Allowance. You can read more about income not counted in
the means test in our document, [ Cash income not included in the means test
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-test/) .
