####  **Speech and language disorder**

Special classes for pupils with specific speech and language disorder are
attached to mainstream primary schools. Pupils who meet specific criteria may
be eligible for such classes. The Department sets out the [ criteria for
Enrolment in Special Classes for Pupils with Specific Speech and Language
Disorder (Word doc). ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/14776/b7bfe9ed47824285a55184b83b050b3c.doc)

Schools may apply to the Special Educational Needs Organiser to establish
these classes. Schools must have at least 5 eligible pupils to retain a class.
A full-time teacher is assigned to each special class with a pupil to teacher
ratio of 7:1. Eligible pupils may spend up to 2 years in a special class. An
enhanced capitation grant is paid for each pupil enrolled in these classes.

The Health Service Executive funds the [ speech and language therapy services
](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/speech-and-language-
therapy-services/) for the children attending these classes.

If a school has such a class and there are places to spare, these places may
be offered to a maximum of 2 pupils who do not meet the eligibility criteria
but who could benefit from enrolment in the class. The offer of a place must
be supported by the recommendation of a speech and language therapist and/or a
psychologist.

In general, a child who is eligible for placement in a special class is also
eligible for [ free transport ](/en/education/special-education-needs/school-
transport-for-children-with-special-needs/) to their nearest class.

Pupils who meet the criteria for classes may also qualify for additional
teaching support (even if there is a special class available). You may apply
for this support to the Special Educational Needs Organiser - see 'How to
apply' below.

Pupils with mild speech and language difficulties may qualify for teaching
support from the schoolâ€™s general allocation of teaching resources as outlined
above.
