##  Investigations and sanctions

If you do not want to want to go through the RTB’s dispute resolution process,
but want to report an issue about a landlord breaking residential tenancies
legislation, you can contact the RTB who will investigate certain issues and
sanction the landlord if necessary. The RTB will investigate if a landlord:

  * Does not comply with [ Rent Pressure Zone ](https://www.rtb.ie/beginning-a-tenancy/setting-rent) rules - including rules about rent increases in RPZ’s and RPZ exemptions 
  * Does not register tenancies with the RTB within 1 month of the tenancy beginning 
  * Does not notify the RTB of changes to a tenancy within a month of the changes taking effect. For example changes to the rent and tenant details. 
  * Does not offer a tenancy back to a tenant if the property becomes available to rent again, and the tenant was originally asked to leave the property because the landlord was selling the property, changing its use, substantially refurbishing it, or because they needed it for themselves or an immediate family member 
  * Provides false or misleading reasons for terminating a tenancy 
  * Looks for a deposit and advance payment of more than 2 month’s rent 

You can contact the RTB’s Investigations and Sanctions Information Unit on
0818 776297 to discuss your concerns about a landlord who is not complying
with these rules, or you can email investigations@rtb.ie. Alternatively, you
can make a formal complaint about the landlord using the RTB [ Sanctions and
Alleged Breach Complaint form (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/forms/Complaint_form_%28Revised_July_2022%29_v.6.pdf)
.

If you email or phone the Investigations and Sanctions Unit, your name will
not be given to the landlord, and you will not receive any updates from the
RTB about your issue. However, if you make a formal complaint this will be
sent to the landlord with your name, and the RTB will also keep you updated
about the investigation. Find out more about the [ investigations process on
the RTB website ](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-
compliance/investigations-sanctions) .

The RTB has information on the [ differences between the dispute resolution
process and the complaints process ](https://www.rtb.ie/dispute-
resolution/the-difference-between-submitting-a-complaint-and-a-dispute) , if
you are unsure about which way to resolve your issue.

These [ additional powers ](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-
compliance/investigations-sanctions) to investigate and sanction landlords
were introduced under the Residential Tenancies (Amendment) Act and commenced
in July 2019.
