###

Under the Equal Status Acts 2000-2018, service providers are prohibited from
discriminating against people with disabilities. They must provide reasonable
accommodation when they facilitate a guide dog on their premises.

Hotels, guesthouses and other types of accommodation must let you bring your
guide dog onto the premises and help you find suitable accommodation.
Guidedogs.ie has information on [ how to accommodate a guide dog
](https://www.guidedogs.ie/what-we-do/guide-dogs/access-rights-for-guide-dogs)
.

Pubs, restaurants and theatres must also facilitate you on their premises. You
cannot be discriminated against for having your guide dog with you. You can
find out more about bringing your guide dog, assistance, and companion dog
into places that serve food, like a shop, cafe, or restaurant from the [ Food
Safety Authority of Ireland ](https://www.fsai.ie/business-advice/running-a-
food-business/caterers/animals-in-retail-food-premises) website. Irish Guide
dogs for the blind also have information about access rights for [ assistance
dogs ](https://www.guidedogs.ie/access-rights) and for [ guide dogs
](https://www.guidedogs.ie/what-we-do/guide-dogs/access-rights-for-guide-dogs)
.

Taxi, hackney and other small public service vehicles must carry your guide
dog.

Airlines must let your guide dog accompany you in the cabin of the plane free
of charge. However, you must notify the airline that you will be accompanied
by your guide dog at least 48 hours before travelling. You must also let them
know if you need any other assistance, for example, when travelling through
the airport. Airlines may have different policies about how many guide dogs
they can carry aboard a flight at any one time. So, you should tell the
airline when you are booking the flight that you will be travelling with a
guide dog. Find out more about [ access rights for travelling with a guide dog
](https://guidedogs.ie/get-support/access-rights/) on guidedogs.ie.
