###  Applying for an exemption from VRT (or a repayment of VRT and VAT)

You can find further details on this information from [ Revenue’s website
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-allowances/guide-to-
vrt/reliefs-and-exemptions/scheme-for-persons-with-disabilities.aspx) and
their [ guide to the Tax Relief Scheme (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/vrt7.pdf) .

**Applying online**

You can apply for an **exemption from VRT** (or a repayment of VRT and VAT)
online on Revenue’s MyAccount.

You can register for [ MyAccount on revenue.ie ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-
web/home.html) . If you are applying for the first time, you will need to
submit a primary medical certificate which you can upload on MyAccount.
Revenue’s [ Quick Guide to Making Claims for Relief Online (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/online-dd1form-guide.pdf) shows what the application
process looks like.

If your application is accepted for _exemption from VRT_ , your account will
be updated and you will get authorisation to buy a vehicle and an Exemption
Notification that allows the vehicle to be registered as exempt from VRT at
the [ NCTS centre ](https://www.ncts.ie/1095/) . After you buy the vehicle,
you may need to send further documentation.

If your application is accepted for _repayment of VRT and VAT_ , you may need
to send further documentation.

**Applying by post**

If you do not have online access, you can submit a paper form - [ Form DD1
(pdf) ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/form-dd1.pdf) .

If you are applying for the first time, you should also include the original
Primary Medical Certificate. You may also need to submit additional documents
along with your application.

You can post your application freepost to the Central Repayments Office, see
the address below.

Postal applications may experience delays during peak periods, so you are
encouraged to use the online service if possible.
