##  Credit and your consumer rights

The rules that apply to credit agreements are set out in consumer credit
legislation - the [ Consumer Credit Act 1995
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1995/act/24/revised/en/html) and the [
European Communities (Consumer Credit Agreements) Regulations 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2010/si/281/made/en/print) .

Lenders regulated by the Central Bank must comply with the [ Consumer
Protection Code 2012 ](https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/consumer-
protection/consumer-protection-codes-regulations#unofficial-consolidation) .
There are also [ specific rules for moneylenders
](https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-market-
sectors/moneylenders/regulatory-requirements-and-guidance) .

Consumer credit legislation and codes contain specific rules that apply [ when
lenders advertise ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/credit-advertising/) and sell loans. For example, lenders must carry
out tests to check whether you can afford the repayments before giving you a
loan or mortgage. Lenders must not offer you a pre-approved loan or mortgage
that you have not asked for. Lenders must not increase your credit card limit,
unless you ask them to.

A lender cannot phone you about your loan without your agreement between 9 pm
and 9 am, Monday to Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or public holiday.
They can only visit you in person if you have agreed to the visit.

The lender is not allowed to call you or to visit you at your place of work
unless you are also living there, or unless all efforts to contact you
elsewhere have failed. Only the person involved in the loan can be contacted
about it. This means that your lender cannot contact your employer or a member
of your family about your loan.

Read more about [ your rights when you buy a financial product
](/en/consumer/financial-products/your-rights-when-buying-financial-products/)
.
