###  Derelict sites levy

If you are the owner of _urban land_ that has been entered into the Derelict
Sites Register, you must pay an annual levy to the local authority – see
‘Rates’ below. The Minister for Housing, Planning, Community and Local
Government can classify any area to be an _urban area_ , as long as it is not
part of a county or other borough.

If you do not pay the derelict sites levy within 2 months of receiving the
notice, and if you have not reached an agreement with the local authority,
interest will be charged on the full amount at a rate of 1.25% a month or part
of a month. The local authority can take you to court to recover this amount,
if necessary.

If the site is removed from the Derelict Sites Register, the local authority
will calculate the amount of levy that you owe, based on how many days are
left in the financial year. It will then issue a refund or notice of payment
outstanding.

Any change in the valuation of the land means that the levy on that land will
also change. If the value is decreased, the local authority will re-calculate
the amount according to the new valuation and refund any excess that you may
have paid. If the value of the property is increased, the local authority is
entitled to demand the levy on the amount of the increase.

If the local authority is satisfied that you have plans to develop the
property, and planning permission has been granted for this development, you
can enter into a bond instead of paying the derelict sites levy. This bond is
a guarantee that has been secured with a bank or insurance company, agreeing
that all derelict site levies due on the property will be paid if the planned
scheme (or a similar scheme) is not carried out within 5 years.
