##  Introduction

The Occupational Injuries Scheme provides benefits for people injured or
incapacitated by an accident at work or while travelling directly to or from
work. The scheme also covers people who have contracted a disease as a result
of the type of work they do. There are a number of benefits available and
there are different conditions attached to each benefit.

The benefits are:

  * [ Injury Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/)
  * [ Disablement Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disablement-benefit/)
  * Incapacity Supplement 
  * Constant Attendance Allowance 
  * [ Medical Care Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/medical-care-scheme/) . 

There are also [ death benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-
benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/) under this scheme:

  * Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension (paid at a higher rate than the ordinary Contributory Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension) 
  * Orphan's Pension 
  * Funeral Grant 

** Injury Benefit  ** is a weekly payment if you are unfit for work due to the
accident or disease. Payment is normally made from the 4th day of incapacity
for work. Injury Benefit can be paid for up to 26 weeks from the date of your
accident or development of the disease (not the date you apply). If the
accident or disease caused you to lose physical or mental ability you should
apply for Disablement Benefit before your Injury Benefit ceases. If you are
still unfit for work after 26 weeks you may apply for [ Illness Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/) or [ Disability
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) .

**Disablement Benefit** is paid if you have a loss of physical or mental
faculty after the accident or disease. You do not have to be unfit for work.
If you are fit for work immediately after the accident you should apply within
3 months of the injury or onset of the disease. You must have a medical
assessment to determine the degree of loss of faculty and the rate of benefit
is based on this. (Civil servants insured at Class B are not eligible for
Disablement Benefit for the first 26 weeks after the date of the accident.
Half-rate benefit only is payable after this period.) Disablement Benefit can
be paid as a lump sum (called Disablement Gratuity) or as a weekly payment
(called Disablement Pension).

**Incapacity Supplement** is a weekly supplement, which may be paid if you are
not eligible for Illness Benefit or another social welfare payment. To get the
supplement you must be getting Disablement Pension _and_ be permanently
incapable of work.

**Constant Attendance Allowance** is a weekly allowance, which you may be paid
if you are getting Disablement Benefit and are so seriously disabled as to
need someone to help you daily at home to attend to your personal needs.

If you incur medical costs as a result of your occupational injury or disease,
you can claim for the cost of certain expenses which are not already covered
by the [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](/en/health/health-system/health-
service-executive/) or through the [ Treatment Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/treatment-benefit-scheme/) under the Medical
Care Scheme.

The cost of private or semi-private accommodation and treatment **can**
**not** be recouped under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

  
