##  Introduction

If you are getting a social welfare payment and your personal circumstances
change you **must** contact the Department of Social Protection. A change in
your circumstances can mean you get an increase or a decrease in your social
welfare payment. You could even be entitled to an extra or different social
welfare payment.

Contacting the Department will mean you get your increase faster or avoid
repaying overpayments.

A change in your personal circumstances may mean you qualify for a social
welfare payment for the first time. For example, if you were working and
recently lost your job, you may be entitled to [ Jobseeker's Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) . If
you are in private rented accommodation you may also qualify for [ Rent
Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) . [ Read more about losing your job
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/losing-your-job/) .

Sometimes, there can be a change in your personal circumstances but you don't
qualify for a social welfare payment. In this case, you may qualify for
Supplementary Welfare Allowance. For example, if your employer does not pay
you when you are out of work sick, but you don't qualify for Illness Benefit,
you may qualify for [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) .

You can also read more about [ Rent Supplement and changes to your
circumstances ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) .
