###  Duty solicitor service

If you are facing Circuit Court repossession proceedings, you may be able to
get some help at Court from the duty solicitor. This is a solicitor from the [
Abhaile scheme’s solicitor panel ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Lawyers-
and-Experts/Legal-professionals-in-civil-cases/Abhaile/The-Duty-Solicitor-
Service-Panel.xlsx) who is normally on duty at a Circuit Court on repossession
hearing dates. You cannot choose the duty solicitor, as the Legal Aid Board
assigns solicitors from the panel to attend on particular dates.

The duty solicitor service is a limited service to provide advice and help to
unrepresented borrowers at court. Your consultation solicitor will explain
this in more detail.

Normally, you should already have written financial and legal advice under the
Scheme, including advice from the consultation solicitor on any repossession
proceedings.

If you have not applied in time to get such advice, the duty solicitor may
still be able to give you some more limited help, but only if you have already
applied to MABS. **If your mortgage lender has already issued repossession
proceedings against your home, and you have not yet applied for the Scheme,
you should contact MABS as soon as possible – see ‘Where to apply’ below.**

The duty solicitor may be able to:

  * Speak for you in Court, to explain what steps you are taking to deal with your mortgage arrears 
  * Apply for the proceedings to be adjourned if you are trying to put a solution in place 
  * Explain to you what is happening in the proceedings 

However, they may be helping several Scheme borrowers in court on that day, so
you should arrive well in advance of the time shown on the Court papers, and
ask for MABS when you arrive. MABS advisers also attend the Circuit Court on
repossession hearing dates, to provide information and support. However, they
cannot give legal advice or speak for you in Court.

The duty solicitor cannot act as your legal aid solicitor or defend the
repossession proceedings on your behalf. This Scheme does not cover legal aid
for defending repossession proceedings. If you have a valid legal defence to
the repossession and want to [ apply for legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-
and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) , you should apply for that to
the Legal Aid Board.
