##  Other measures

**Driving test fees**

The driving test fee for a Car (category ‘B’), Car and trailer (EB), Moped
(M), Motorcycle (A, A1) and Works Vehicle (W) has increased from €38 to €75.
The fee for all other categories has increased to €110. Effective from 7 April
2009.

**Banking regulation**

The Central Bank of Ireland will have a central role in financial supervision.
It will in future be headed by a Commission, chaired by the Governor.

A National Asset Management Agency will be established on a statutory basis,
under the aegis of the National Treasury Management Agency. ‘Risky’ assets
will be transferred from relevant financial institutions to the new National
Asset Management Agency.

**Civil and public service**

A ban on recruitment and promotion in the civil and public service was
announced on 27 March 2009. Numbers will further be reduced by measures which
include:

  * An early retirement scheme for civil and public servants aged 50 or over (from 1 May 2009) 
  * Civil servants taking a 3-year career break before 1 September 2009 will receive payment of one-third of a year’s salary (up to €12,500) per year over the 3 years. 
  * A new Shorter Working Year Scheme will replace the Term Time Leave Scheme for civil servants 

The Government is to consider extending the new career break and shorter
working week schemes to the wider public service.

Staff in the civil service will also be allocated and redeployed to areas of
highest priority.

**TDs and Senators**

The Government has decided to introduce a number of additional changes to the
remuneration of Deputies and Senators.

  * 10% reduction in all expenses other than mileage rates, which have already been reduced by 25%. 
  * Deputies will no longer receive long service payments or increments. 
  * Former Ministers will no longer be paid Ministerial pensions while they are still members of the Oireachtas 
  * Oireachtas members who are on paid leave of absence as teachers may no longer keep the difference between their teacher's salary and the cost of employing a replacement. 
  * The allowances paid to Oireachtas Committee chairs will be halved and the payments to whips and vice-chairs are to be abolished. 

The Oireachtas Commission has also put forward proposals for a reduction in
the number of Oireachtas Committees

The Taoiseach announced on 7 April 2009 that the number of Ministers of State
will be reduced from 20 to 15.

**Public sector pay review**

The Review Body on Higher Remuneration in the Public Sector is undertaking a
new review of top level pay, to be completed by July 2009. It is expected that
salary rates will be benchmarked against those in other EU states.

**Indications of further tax measures**

Options for future measures may include the taxation of Child Benefit, the
introduction of a carbon tax, a form of property tax, elimination of
unnecessary reliefs and a review of all areas of tax-exempt incomes. The
Government intends to broaden the tax base in future budgets.

The Commission on Taxation is examining various aspects of pension tax
treatment including the treatment of lump sums.

**Indications of further social welfare measures**

Child Benefit may be means-tested or taxed.

While social welfare rates will not be reduced this year, they may be reviewed
in future years if there are reductions in the cost of living.

The campaign against welfare fraud will be intensified by allocating increased
staff to the Department of Social and Family Affairs. It will target, in
particular, fraudulent claims for Child Benefit and other payments by people
who are no longer resident in Ireland.

**Capital revenue**

The Government will look at introducing a national infrastructure bond to
raise money for capital projects.  

_**Page edited:** 9 December 2009 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/budgets/supplementary-budget-2009/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Supplementary%20Budget%202009&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/budgets/supplementary-budget-2009/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/budgets/supplementary-budget-2009/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Supplementary%20Budget%202009&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/budgets/supplementary-budget-2009/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))
