##  Duties of organisations

Organisations that have statutory responsibilities under the Children First
Act 2015 are those that provide a relevant service to children and young
people. The Act sets out a [ list of these organisations
](https://www.tusla.ie/children-first/children-first-2017/relevant-services/)
.

All organisations that provide services to children must develop specific
policies and procedures on how to create a safe environment to prevent
deliberate harm or abuse to the children availing of their services.

The legislation imposes deadlines on organisations in both carrying out a risk
assessment and preparing a [ Child Safeguarding Statement
](http://www.tusla.ie/children-first/organisations/what-is-a-child-
safeguarding-statement) .

A [ designated liaison person ](https://www.tusla.ie/children-
first/organisations/appointing-a-designated-liaison-person/) may be appointed
to ensure that reporting procedures within your organisation are followed, so
that child welfare and protection concerns are referred promptly to Tusla.
Some designated liaison persons will be working in organisations where [
mandated persons ](http://www.tusla.ie/children-first/mandated-persons/what-
are-the-legal-obligations-of-a-mandated-person) are also employed.

Under the Children First Act 2015, mandated persons are people who have
ongoing contact with children and families and who, because of their
qualifications, training and experience are in a key position to protect
children from harm. A mandated person is required to report any knowledge,
belief or reasonable suspicion that a child has been harmed, is being harmed,
or is at risk of being harmed to Tusla. Tusla has detailed information on the
[ legal obligations of a mandated person ](https://www.tusla.ie/children-
first/mandated-persons/what-are-the-legal-obligations-of-a-mandated-person/)
and [ the threshold for making a mandated report
](https://www.tusla.ie/children-first/mandated-persons/what-are-the-
thresholds-for-making-a-mandated-report/) .

Tusla has published [ A Guide for the Reporting of Child Protection and
Welfare Concerns (pdf)
](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/4214-TUSLA_Guide_to_Reporters_Guide_A4_v3.pdf)
for individuals and organisations working with children.  
