##  Other sources of information and advice

Several other organisations provide information and advice to people facing
mortgage arrears and other [ problem debt ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/) .

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commissionâ€™s website has information
about [ mortgage arrears ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/debt/mortgage-
arrears/) and a [ step-by-step debt action plan
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/debt/debt-action-plan/) for dealing with
debt in general.

The Free Legal Advice Centres (FLAC) have published a [ guide to the Code of
Conduct on Mortgage Arrears 2013 (pdf)
](http://www.flac.ie/download/pdf/moving_out_of_mortgage_arrears_online_version_finaloct2013.pdf)
.

You may want to get legal advice on your options and on what happens if the
mortgage lender takes steps to repossess your home. [ FLAC
](http://www.flac.ie/) provides free legal advice from a nationwide network of
voluntary advice centres, some of which are based in [ Citizens Information
Centres ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

The [ Legal Aid Board ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/)
also provides legal advice, but there is a means test for this. As part of the
[ Abhaile scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-
mortgage-arrears-support/) , the Legal Aid Board operates a panel of
solicitors to provide legal aid and advice to people who are at risk of losing
their home and are referred by MABS. It also operates a duty solicitor service
to provide limited court support for insolvent borrowers in repossession
proceedings. These services are provided for free, under a voucher system.

Other organisations that provide advice and assistance include the [ Irish
Mortgage Holders Organisation (IMHO) ](https://www.mortgageholders.ie/) and [
StepChange Debt Charity Ireland ](https://www.stepchange.org/) . IMHO has
arrangements with [ AIB Group ](https://www.mortgageholders.ie/fees/) , where
customers can contact IMHO for direct assistance (free of charge) in dealing
with AIB Group about their mortgage arrears.

_**Page edited:** 6 September 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Overview%20of%20mortgage%20debt&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Overview%20of%20mortgage%20debt&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
