##  What should I do if I am behind with my mortgage payments?

You may be worried about losing your home, if you’re behind in your mortgage
payments.

**Talk to your lender. If you can’t - talk to MABS.**

MABS is part of Abhaile, the free mortgage arrears support scheme. Under
Abhaile, MABS has a dedicated confidential, free, and independent mortgage
arrears service.

MABS is a one-stop-shop for mortgage debt advice and referral.

No matter what your situation is, MABS will help you work out the next steps.

Take control of what happens next.

**Call MABS today on 0818 07 2000 for independent information, non-judgmental
advice and referral.**

The mortgage on your house, flat or apartment is probably the biggest and most
important financial commitment that you have. When you [ take out a mortgage
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) ,
the mortgage lender gets a claim on your property. If you fall into arrears,
your lender may eventually look to [ repossess your home ](/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/home-repossession/) .

If you are having difficulties paying your mortgage, even if you are not
actually in arrears, but are in _pre-arrears_ , you should contact your
lender’s Arrears Support Unit immediately. Delaying and allowing mortgage
arrears to build up will make the problems worse. Your lender does not want to
repossess your home. They want you to continue making your payments –
repossession is the last resort.

Lending institutions such as banks must follow [ codes of conduct
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-
mortgages/) when dealing with people who are in mortgage arrears or pre-
arrears. Local authorities operate under [ similar guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/108738/2295fd29-65d6-420e-84fb-d33abbcf7099.pdf#page=1)
.

In line with these codes, your lender must take certain steps to deal with any
problems you have in paying your mortgage. Under the Central Bank’s [ Code of
Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA) (pdf)
](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/Regulation/consumer-
protection/other-codes-of-conduct/24-gns-4-2-7-2013-ccma.pdf?sfvrsn=4) ,
lenders must operate a [ Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP)
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-
process/) when dealing with customers in mortgage arrears and pre-arrears.

Read more on [ mabs.ie/abhaile ](https://www.mabs.ie/en/abhaile/) .

**Other loans and debts**

Even if if you are not in mortgage arrears, or have no mortgage at all, your
home could be in danger of repossession if you have other debts. If you build
up other debts and are unable to repay them, then the people who you owe money
to may register that debt as a 'judgment mortgage' against your home and look
to recover their money in that way (see [ our page on repossession
](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/home-repossession/) ).

[ Read more about dealing with problem debt ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/) .
