##  Payments

[ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) is
the most common payment to families with children. You are entitled to it if
you have dependent children that meet the criteria.

**Other payments depend on your family circumstances and other factors, such
as whether you have enough** [ **PRSI contributions** ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/)
**or you are on a low income.**

[ Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-
safety-benefit/) is paid to a woman who has sufficient PRSI contributions and
is granted Health and Safety Leave from employment. You may be granted leave
if your employer cannot remove a risk to your health while you are pregnant,
breastfeeding or involved in night-work, or assign you alternative "risk-free"
duties.

[ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-
benefit/) is paid for 26 weeks to women who are on maternity leave from work
and who have paid a certain amount of PRSI (Pay Related Social Insurance).

[ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-
benefit/) is paid for 24 weeks to a parent of an adopted child. If a couple
are adopting a child, one parent can apply for Adoptive Benefit. You must
satisfy certain social insurance (PRSI) contribution conditions on your own
insurance record.

[ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-
benefit/) is a payment paid to people on paternity leave from work who have
paid a certain amount of PRSI.

[ Parent's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-
benefit/) is a payment for people who are on parent’s leave from work and paid
a certain amount of PRSI. Each parent gets 9 weeks payment in the child’s
first 2 years after birth or adoption.

[ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) (OFP) is paid to men and women who are bringing
children up without the support of a partner. You must satisfy a means test
and a habitual residence test. If you are working you may also get a [ Single
Person Child Carer Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/single-person-child-carer-tax-credit/) if you meet the criteria. You
do not have to get OPF to claim this tax credit.

[ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/) is a special payment for lone parents
whose youngest child is aged between 7 and 13 years.

A social welfare payment can be paid to the person taking care of an [
orphaned child ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-
orphan-payments/) up to 18 years of age or up to 22 if he or she is in full-
time education. There are three different payments and a child or their
guardian may qualify for one of these payments if both parents are dead, or
one parent is dead or failed to provide for the child and the other parent is
unknown, or has abandoned or failed to provide for the child.

[ Working Family Payment (WFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) is a weekly tax-free payment available to
employees with children. To qualify you must have at least one child who
normally lives with you or is financially supported by you and your net
average weekly family income must be below a certain amount for your family
size.

The [ Back to Work Family Dividend ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-work-family-dividend/) scheme aims to help families to move
from social welfare into employment. It gives financial support to people with
qualified children who take up employment or self-employment and as a result
stop claiming a jobseeker's payment or a one-parent family payment.

[ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/)
is designed to help meet the cost of uniforms and footwear for students
attending school. The scheme operates from June to September each year. To
qualify, your total household income must be below a certain amount or you
must be getting certain social welfare payments.

Deserted wife's payment is paid to women who were deserted by their husband
and have no dependent children. This scheme was closed to new applications in
January 1997.

_**Page edited:** 7 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/payments-to-families-and-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Payments%20to%20families%20and%20children&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/payments-to-families-and-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/payments-to-families-and-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Payments%20to%20families%20and%20children&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/payments-to-families-and-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
