##  Legal advice and representation

It is always advisable to get legal advice and representation, however, you
are entitled to represent yourself. The Law Society has a [ directory of
solicitors' firms ](http://www.lawsociety.ie/Pages/Find-a-Firm/) which you can
search for a solicitor in your area.

To enquire whether you are [ eligible for legal aid
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-
legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) , [ contact your nearest law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) . Legal
aid is generally not free and most recipients must pay a contribution towards
costs. You can download [ an application form for Legal Services (pdf)
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Our-Services/Legal-Aid-Services/Application-
For-Legal-Services-Form-October-2014.pdf) or you can [ apply for civil legal
aid or advice online ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-
services/apply-for-legal-aid-online/) . If you cannot afford to pay the
contribution, you can [ apply to the Legal Aid Board to have it waived
](https://legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-services/apply-for-a-
waiver-of-contribution/) .

The [ Family Mediation Service ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-
services/family-mediation/) can help couples who have decided to separate to
negotiate their own terms of agreement, while addressing the needs and
interests of all involved. The service is free. Read more about [ family
mediation for separating couples
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/) .

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) ](https://www.flac.ie/) is an independent,
voluntary organisation that operates a network of legal advice clinics
throughout the country. These clinics are confidential, free of charge and
open to all. Contact your nearest [ Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC services in
your area. FLAC also runs an [ information and referral line for basic legal
information ](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline.html) .

FLAC has produced a series of basic leaflets on various areas of law which may
be useful. These are available from your local Citizens Information Centre and
from FLAC or can be [ downloaded from the FLAC website
](http://www.flac.ie/help/online/infoleaflets2014.html) .
