##  How to apply

To enquire whether you are [ eligible for legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-
and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) , [ contact your nearest law
centre ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) .
The law centre staff will assess your means and advise on financial
eligibility. You can also [ check whether you may be financially eligible
online ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Our-Services/Legal-Aid-Services/On-
Line-Financial-Eligibility-Indicator/) .

If you wish to engage the services of a solicitor privately, the [ Law Society
of Ireland ](http://www.lawsociety.ie) maintains a list of registered
solicitors throughout the country.

Contact the [ Family Mediation Service ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/) for
more information about the service and a list of its centres throughout the
country. Contact details of private family law mediation solicitors are
available on [ lawsociety.ie ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-
Solicitor/Mediator-Search/) and the Mediator's Institute of Ireland website [
mii.ie ](http://www.themii.ie/) .

The [ Irish Assocation of Collaborative Professionals ](http://www.acp.ie/)
promotes the use of collaborative law. You will find more information and
lists of practioners on its website.

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) ](https://www.flac.ie/) is an independent,
voluntary organisation. A limited number of [ FLAC phone clinic appointments
](https://www.flac.ie/help/advice/) are offered in conjunction with [ Citizen
Information Services ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) around the
country. These appointments are with a volunteer lawyer and are confidential
and free of charge. Contact your nearest [ Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC phone
clinic appointments in your area. FLACâ€™s [ Information and Referral
](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline/) Line for basic legal information is open
Monday to Friday from 9.30am-1pm.
