###  Other income tax provisions

**Mortgage interest relief**

The rate of mortgage interest relief for first-time buyers is being increased
from 20% to 25% in year 1 and year 2 and to 22.5% in years 3, 4 and 5. The
additional relief will be available to new first-time buyers and first-time
buyers who have bought a house in the last 4 years. These changes take effect
from 1 January 2009.

The rate of mortgage interest relief for non-first-time buyers is being
reduced from 20% to 15% from 1 January 2009.

**Tax relief on unreimbursed medical expenses**

Tax relief on medical expenses will be granted at the standard rate only (20%)
from 1 January 2009, with the exception of nursing home expenses which will be
standard-rated from 1 January 2010.

**Levy on car parking facilities provided to employees by their employers**

A flat rate levy of €200 per year will be charged on employees whose employer
provides them with car parking facilities. The levy only applies to employer-
provided car parking facilities situated in the main urban centres.

**Cycle to work scheme**

From 1 January 2009, the provision of bicycles and associated safety equipment
by employers to employees who agree to use the bicycles to cycle to work will
be treated as a tax exempt benefit-in-kind. The exemption may only apply once
in any 5 year period in respect of any employee. There will be a limit on the
value of such purchases of €1,000 for each employee. The scheme may also be
implemented through salary sacrifice arrangements, whereby an employee agrees
to forgo part of their salary to cover the costs associated with the purchase
of the bicycle and associated safety equipment. Where such salary sacrifice
arrangements are implemented, they must be completed over a maximum period of
12 months.

**Increase in the specified rates for preferential home loans and other
loans**

An employee in receipt of a preferential loan is charged income tax on the
difference between the interest actually paid and the amount which would have
been payable at the “specified” rates of interest for the loans. To reflect
changes in interest rates, the specified rate in respect of loans (other than
home loans which remain at 5.5%) is being increased from 13% to 15% from 1
January 2009.

**Tax relief for the donations of heritage items**

The tax relief in respect of the donation of heritage items to approved State
institutions is being limited to 80% of the market value of the heritage item
donated.

The tax relief in respect of the donation of heritage property to the Irish
Heritage Trust is being limited to 80% of the market value of the heritage
property donated.

The ceiling on the aggregate value of donations qualifying for each of these
schemes in any one year will remain at €6 million.

**Change to Benefit-in-Kind (BIK) charge for company cars**

The Finance Bill will contain provisions to change the basis of the BIK charge
on company cars to relate it to the CO2 emissions level of the car.
