###  Legal guardianship applications after changes in relationship status of
the parents

Where a parent is joint guardian and then subsequently marries or becomes a
qualified cohabitant, the other guardian will remain the joint guardian of the
child.

It is possible though for the step-parent or a person who has lived with the
parent for a minimum of 3 years (qualified cohabitant) to apply to court to
become a guardian. To do this, the step-parent or qualified cohabitant must
have shared the parental responsibility for the day-to-day care of the child
with the parent they live with for at least 2 years

If a child has no parent or guardian who is willing or able to exercise the
rights and responsibilities of a guardian, someone who has provided for the
child’s day-to-day care for a continuous period of more than 1 year may also
apply for guardianship, for example, a foster parent.

An application for guardianship must be notified to all other parents or
guardians of the child, although the decision will not affect that parent or
guardian’s existing rights in relation to the child. In deciding whether or
not to allow the guardianship application, the court will consider how much
any other guardians are involved in the child’s upbringing, and any views of
child or children involved. If guardianship is granted, the new guardian’s
rights will be set out in the court’s order. These may not be as extensive as
the rights of the other guardians.

Alternatively, the parent and their new spouse/partner/qualified cohabitant
may wish to adopt the child. To do this, they must seek consent from the
child's other guardian. If the child's other guardian consents to the
adoption, then he or she gives up the right to guardianship and parentage of
the child.
