##  What will happen in court?

When the case goes to [ trial ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/criminal-trial/) , you may be called as a [ witness
](/en/justice/witnesses/being-a-witness/) or you may wish to attend and watch
the trial. If so, you may decide to use the [ Victim Support at Court
](https://www.vsac.ie/) service. Trained volunteers offer support and
companionship to crime victims or witnesses when attending court.

The court can provide a [ video link facility ](/en/justice/witnesses/giving-
evidence-by-television-link#l19924) for victims aged under 18 who are giving
evidence in serious sexual or violent crime cases, as well as for vulnerable
or intimidated witnesses.

The Garda√≠ are obliged to provide the following information if you request it:

  * When and where the court case will take place 
  * What the suspect (the defendant in the case) is being charged with 
  * If the defendant is convicted, the date they are due to be sentenced 

If the defendant pleads guilty or is found guilty, you have a right to make a
personal statement before they are sentenced. This is called a [ victim impact
statement ](https://www.dppireland.ie/victims-witnesses/making-a-victim-
impact-
statement/#:~:text=A%20Victim%20Impact%20Statement%20is,also%20have%20lost%20out%20financially.)
. It gives you a chance to describe, in your own words, how the crime has
impacted you physically, psychologically and financially.

The court may consider your statement when it is [ sentencing
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sentence/) an offender. At a later
stage, the [ Parole Board
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-system/being-released-
from-prison/#766819) may also take it into account if the offender has been
imprisoned and is being considered for temporary release. In some situations,
the judge may ask the [ Probation Service ](/en/justice/probation-and-welfare-
services/probation-service/) to prepare a victim impact report for the court.

You have the right to be informed about any final decision in a case and the
reasons for the decision. However, you do not have a right to be given a
reason in a case where a jury made the decision.
