##  How to apply for DARE

If you wish to apply for a college place under the DARE scheme you should
apply through the [ Central Applications Office (CAO)
](http://www.cao.ie/index.php) . When you are filling in the CAO form online
you must complete the part of the form to say that you have a disability or
specific learning difficulty.

You will then be directed to the separate online Supplementary Information
Form.

You can request a paper version of the form from the CAO.

The Supplementary Information Form has 3 sections:

  * **Section A** asks for information on your disability and if you wish to be considered for DARE. 
  * **Section B** is an [ Educational Impact Statement ](http://accesscollege.ie/dare/making-an-application/educational-impact/) , to be completed by your school. It provides information about your educational experience and assists the decision about the third-level supports you need. 
  * **Section C** is [ Evidence of Disability ](http://accesscollege.ie/dare/providing-evidence-of-your-disability/) which must be completed by the [ accepted medical consultant or specialist ](http://accesscollege.ie/dare/providing-evidence-of-your-disability/) for your particular disability. It provides verification of your disability and helps the decision about the third-level supports that you need. Sections B and C can only be sent to the CAO in paper form. The CAO advises all students to get a certificate of posting when sending documents by post. 

**Supports for students with disabilities**

If you have indicated on your CAO form that you have a disability or specific
learning difficulty, the college's [ Disability Service
](http://www.ahead.ie/yourdisabilityoffice) will be informed as soon as you
accept a place, and they will get in touch with you to work out what supports
they can provide.

Even if you didn't tick this box on the CAO form, you can still access the
available supports by contacting the college's Disability Service at any stage
during your time in college.

**Key dates for 2024 applications using DARE**

**6 November 2023** \- the [ online CAO application facility
](https://www.cao.ie/apply.php) for 2024 opens.

**1 February 2024** \- your main application must reach the CAO by 5 p.m. Late
CAO applications are not considered for DARE.

**1 March 2024** \- the following items must reach the CAO by 5 p.m.

  * Indicate that you wish to be considered for DARE by ticking 'Yes' on question 1. 
  * Complete Section A of the Supplementary Information Form. 

**15 March 2024** , the rest of the Supplementary Information Form must reach
the CAO by 5 p.m. These are:

  * Section B (the Educational Impact Statement) 
  * Section C (evidence of a disability) 

**No applications will be accepted after these closing dates** . The closing
dates are very strict because DARE is an additional application procedure
which needs extra processing time.

You should be notified by post by the end of **June 2024** (after the Leaving
Certificate exam) telling you whether you are eligible for the DARE scheme. If
you are told you are not eligible you can ask for your application to be
reviewed. If you are not eligible for DARE, you can still get into college if
you meet the entry requirements for your chosen course.

The CAO helpline at (091) 509 800 can help you with your DARE application. You
can find further information in this list of [ frequently asked questions
](http://accesscollege.ie/dare/help/) on the [ Access College website
](http://accesscollege.ie/dare/) . You can also contact the [ access services
of the colleges participating in the DARE scheme
](http://www.ahead.ie/yourdisabilityoffice) .

The DARE programme runs nationwide [ information sessions
](http://accesscollege.ie/dare/events/) for students and their
parents/guardians to deal with queries about preparing the application.

You can download a detailed [ Application Handbook and checklists
](https://accesscollege.ie/dare/making-an-application/handbooks-forms/) to
help with your application.

You can also access information about DARE on [ Facebook
](http://www.facebook.com/accesscollege) .
