###  Farm transfers and tax reliefs

There are a number of different tax reliefs available to people inheriting and
passing down farms. These reliefs can eliminate or reduce the tax you need to
pay.

**Agricultural Relief**

If you inherit a farm, there are certain taxes you will have to pay. However,
you may qualify for Agricultural Relief. This reduces the taxable value of
agricultural property and land by 90%.

You must meet certain conditions to qualify for this relief, including passing
the ‘ [ Active Farmer Test’ ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-
inheritance/cat-reliefs/agricultural-relief/what-are-the-conditions-for-
agricultural-relief.aspx) . This means you must have been farming for a
certain amount of time.

Revenue.ie has [ more information on how to qualify for this relief
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-
reliefs/agricultural-relief/index.aspx) .

**Consanguinity Relief**

Consanguinity Relief is available when transferring farmland between certain
family members. This reduces stamp duty to 1% on family farm transfers that
qualify.

To qualify, you must be related to the person transferring the land and do one
of the following:

  * Farm the land yourself for at least 6 years 
  * Lease the land to someone else for a minimum of 6 years, so they can farm it 

The person farming the land must also do one of the following:

  * Have a relevant agricultural qualification, or get one within 4 years of the date they got the land 
  * Spend at least 50% of their time farming land (including this land transfer) 

You can find [ more information on this relief on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/stamp-duty/exemptions-and-
reliefs/reliefs-for-farmers.aspx) .

**Farm Consolidation Relief**

This relief is for farmers who buy and sell agricultural land in order to join
their holdings and improve the viability of their farms. It provides for a
stamp duty rate of 1% on these transactions.

Revenue.ie has [ more information about the Farm Consolidation Relief (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/stamp-duty/stamp-duty-
manual/part-07-exemptions-and-reliefs-from-stamp-duty/section-81c-farm-
consolidation-relief.pdf) .

**Retirement Relief**

If you are 55 or older, you may be able to claim Retirement Relief if you are
passing on your farm or business. This is a relief from Capital Gains Tax.
There are different rules if you are transferring the farm to someone in your
family or outside your family.

See revenue.ie for [ more information on Retirement Relief
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cgt-reliefs/disposal-
of-a-business-or-farm.aspx) .

**Young Trained Farmer Relief**

The Young Trained Farmer Relief gives you full relief from stamp duty if you
meet certain criteria.

You must:

  * Be under 35 
  * Have a relevant agricultural qualification 
  * Have submitted a business plan to Teagasc 
  * Be registered for income tax 
  * Be the head of the farm holding 

You must also intend to:

  * Spend at least 50% of your normal working time farming the transferred land for at least 5 years from the date of transfer 
  * Keep ownership of the land for at least 5 years from the date of transfer 

There is a limit on the amount of relief that can be claimed.

You can read more information about the [ Young Trained Farmer Relief on
revenue.ie (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/stamp-
duty/stamp-duty-manual/part-07-exemptions-and-reliefs-from-stamp-
duty/section-81aa-transfers-of-land-to-young-trained-farmers.pdf) .

**Succession Farm Partnership**

Succession Farm Partnerships are an income tax incentive which encourage
farmers to transfer their farm business to their successors by giving them a
tax credit.

The incentive is worth an annual tax credit of €5,000 for up to 5 years. The
credit is split each year based on the profit-sharing ratio of the partnership
between the farmer and their successors.

To qualify, you must meet certain criteria:

  * Your farm partnership must be registered with the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine’s Register of Partnerships and have a Farm Partnership Registration Number (FPRN) 
  * Your farm partnership must have at least 2 people in it and one of them must be younger than 40 
  * At least one person must have farmed a minimum of 3 hectares for the past 2 years. This person is known as the “farmer”. 
  * At least one other partner must be under 40, have an appropriate qualification in agriculture and hold an entitlement to at least 20% of the profits of the partnership. This person is known as the “successor”. 
  * You must apply in writing 

To apply, you must complete and submit a [ Registration of Succession Farm
Partnership application form (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/77972/2954cf09-004e-4bdd-
abf8-15abcd03f08d.pdf#page=null) .

You should talk to your farm advisor and get professional legal and financial
advice before entering into a Succession Farm Partnership agreement.

Gov.ie has [ more information on the scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/2d52c-guidance-for-farmers-on-succession-
farm-partnerships/) .
