####  **Service charges**

The company must set-up an annual service charges scheme to pay for:

  * The maintenance, insurance and repair of common areas within its control, and 
  * The provision of common services (for example, refuse collection, security, gardening) to unit owners 

The initial charge can be set without holding a meeting of the members but, in
general, these charges must be approved by a general meeting of the members.
If over 75% of the members do not approve the proposed charge, the existing
charge must remain in place.

The service charge cannot be used to pay for matters that are the
responsibility of a developer or builder unless this is agreed in writing by
75% of the members of the company. This approval can only be given if 65% of
the units are sold and can only come into effect 3 years after ownership of
the common areas has been transferred to the owners’ management company.

Unit owners must pay the service charge (including developers in the case of
unsold units). The service charge must be calculated on a transparent and fair
basis and expenditure must be properly recorded. Under the 2011 Act, if the
owner is letting out their unit, they can pass the management fees onto their
tenant. However, the landlord and tenant must agree this in advance, and in
practice this is quite unusual.

Since March 2018, under [ design guidelines for new apartments
](https://www.housing.gov.ie/sites/default/files/publications/files/design_standards_for_new_apartments_-
_guidelines_for_planning_authorities_2018.pdf) planning applications for
apartment developments must have a ‘building lifecycle report’. This report
aims to ensure that new developments are properly managed into the future. It
should include an assessment of the long-term running and maintenance costs of
an estate. The report may be useful to the owners’ management company as it
should show the measures the developer considered to manage and reduce running
costs for the benefit of residents. It will also help the owners’ management
company to calculate the annual service charge and the sinking fund
contribution.
