##  How is a caution decided?

If you are suspected of committing one of the criminal offences covered by the
Scheme, the decision to give a caution (rather than prosecute you) is made by
the local Garda Superintendent (or a Garda Inspector who is acting as the
local Superintendent). When deciding to make a make a referral or give a
caution, the Gardaí must consider:

  * Your alleged behaviour 
  * The surrounding circumstances 
  * Evidence of your guilt 
  * Your understanding of what a caution is and its significance 
  * The public interest 
  * The views of the victim 

**What is the public interest?**

The decision to give a caution instead of prosecution is a serious decision.
The Garda Superintendent must be satisfied that the offence is appropriate for
a caution. The Gardaí must also consider whether the caution is in the public
interest – does it benefit or harm the public as a whole?

**Is the offence listed in the Schedule of Offences**

The offence must be included in the schedule of offences for the Scheme.
Gardaí must also look at the particular circumstances in which you committed
the offence. If the public interest doesn't require a prosecution in those
circumstances, then you may be cautioned.

**The Gardaí consider the offenders circumstances**

Gardaí will consider how suitable you are for the scheme. For example, if the
Gardaí believe that you would be deterred from similar behaviour in the future
if a caution is given, then it is more likely to be used. Adults without any
previous convictions are often considered suitable candidates. If you have a
recent history of offending, you are unlikely to be considered suitable for an
adult caution.

**The Gardaí consider the details of the offence**

They must consider specified details of certain offences. For example, if the
offence is simple possession of cannabis or cannabis resin contrary to [
Section 3 of Misuse of Drugs Act 1977
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1977/act/12/section/3/enacted/en/html) ,
the Gardaí also must consider the type, quantity and value of the drug and
whether in all the circumstances the offence amounts to simple possession.

**What about the victim?**

The Gardaí must get the views of any victim, if possible, before deciding
whether to administer a caution. If the victim thinks a caution should not be
given, any reasons the victim gives must be carefully considered by the Garda
Superintendent before the decision is made.

However, a caution can be given by the Garda Superintendent even if the victim
is opposed to it. In such cases, the Gardaí may ask for advice from the [
Director of Public Prosecutions ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/director-of-
public-prosecutions/) before making a decision to caution.

**Compensation** **to the victim**

If you offer compensation to the victim, the offer may support a decision to
give a caution.

However, the decision to caution does not depend on the offer of compensation
alone. The Gardaí do not become involved in recommending compensation by the
offender to the victim.
