##  Social insurance classes

There are 11 different social insurance classes in Ireland. They are as
follows:

**Class A** applies to people in industrial, commercial and service type
employment who are employed under a contract of service with a reckonable pay
of €38 or more per week from employment. It also includes civil and public
servants recruited from 6 April 1995. In fact, most employees in Ireland pay
PRSI Class A. People on CE schemes pay a special contribution at Class A8/A9.

**Class J** applies to people earning less than €38 per week. However, people
aged over 70 or people in subsidiary employment are always insurable at Class
J, no matter how much they earn. Subsidiary employment for Class J is for
example, people who are insurable at Class B, C, D or H in their main
employment. Only Occupational Injuries Benefit is covered by Class J social
insurance.

**Class E** applies to ministers of religion employed by the Church of Ireland
Representative Body. It covers all social insurance payments except
Jobseeker's Benefit and Occupational Injuries Benefit.

**Class B** applies to civil servants and Gardaí recruited before 6 April
1995, and registered doctors and dentists employed in the Civil Service. It
covers only a limited number of social insurance payments.

**Class C** applies to commissioned Army Officers and members of the Army
Nursing service recruited before 6 April 1995. It covers only a limited number
of social insurance benefits.

**Class D** applies to permanent and pensionable employees in the public
service other than those mentioned in Classes B and C recruited before 6 April
1995. It covers only a limited number of social insurance payments.

**Class H** applies to NCOs and enlisted personnel of the Defence Forces. It
covers all social insurance payments except Occupational Injuries Benefit.

**Class K** applies to public office holders with an income of over €5,200 a
year. Public office holders with weekly income of €100 or less are recorded
under Class M. Class K also applies to people who pay PRSI on unearned income.
There are no social insurance payments for people insured under Class K.

**Class M** applies to employees with no liability to contribute to social
insurance such as employees under 16 years of age, people of pensionable age,
currently 66 years or over (including people previously liable for Class S),
people with an income of €500 or less and insured in Class K, people getting
an occupational pension (on the Occupational Pension income only) or people
within Class K with no contribution liability.

Class M covers certain contributors with Occupational Injuries Benefit.

**Class S** applies to self-employed people including certain company
directors, people in business on their own account and people with income from
investments and rents. [ It covers a limited number of social insurance
payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/class-s-prsi/) .

**Class P** applies to sharefishermen or sharefisherwomen who are classified
as self-employed and who are already paying PRSI under Class S. It covers them
for limited Jobseeker's Benefit, limited Illness Benefit and Treatment
Benefit.

If there is a problem in deciding what class of social insurance you should
pay, the Scope Section in the DSP may decide the issue after examining your
employment situation.

If there is a problem in deciding what class of social insurance you should
pay, contact the Scope section in the DSP (see 'Where to apply' above)

_**Page edited:** 18 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20insurance%20classes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20insurance%20classes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
