##  Introduction

People in employment pay contributions to the Social Insurance Fund. The
contribution you pay depends on your earnings and occupation. This is why it
is called a Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) contribution. Some people who
have unearned income are also liable for PRSI. There are currently 11
different PRSI classes. They are A, B, C, D, E, H, J, K, M, S and P - see
'Social insurance classes' below.

The social insurance payments you can get depend on the PRSI class you are in.

[ Each PRSI class is divided into different subclasses
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/14ecbe-the-different-classes-of-pay-
related-social-insurance-prsi/) . These subclasses do not affect your
entitlements under the social insurance system. They only relate to the amount
of PRSI which you or your employer must pay.

**How is PRSI calculated?**

PRSI is calculated on your _reckonable pay_ . Reckonable pay is your gross pay
including any notional pay (or [ benefit in kind ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-benefits-from-employment/) ,) if applicable.
There is no PRSI relief for employers on pension contributions made by
employees. There is some PRSI relief on pension contributions paid by
employers.

A wide range of payments are available to people who have paid social
insurance. If you are not a Class A contributor, you can't get the full range
of social insurance payments. This is because you are paying less towards
social insurance than a Class A contributor. In certain cases, if your income
falls below a certain amount, you do not have to pay a social insurance
contribution, however, you will still be covered by social insurance because
your employer must pay social insurance for you. More information is available
in our page [ Paying social insurance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) .
