##  Safeguarding your future

Safeguarding risks arise if an adult is prevented from making their own
decisions. Every person is presumed to have the right to make their own
decisions unless deemed not to have capacity, which requires certification by
a healthcare professional.

Safeguarding your future means planning to help reduce the risk of abuse. You
can:

**Choose who can assist you with making decisions**

The [ Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-
health/assisted-decision-making-act/) is a new law that supports the rights of
people to make their own decisions. [ Decision support arrangements
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-
health/decision-support-arrangements/) are legally recognised arrangements for
people who need support to make certain decisions. There are 3 types of
support arrangements for people who currently, or may shortly, face challenges
when making certain decisions:

  * [ Decision-making assistance agreement ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-assistance-agreement/)
  * [ Co-decision-making agreement ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/co-decision-making-agreement/)
  * [ Decision-making representation order ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-representative-order/)

The [ Decision Support Service ](https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie/) has
published an easy-to-read guide on the [ Assisted Decision-Making Capacity Act
2015 (pdf)
](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/sites/default/files/2023-05/DSS%20Easy%20Read%20-%2026%20May%202023.pdf)
and [ My Choices: Getting support to make decisions (pdf)
](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/sites/default/files/2023-04/10919%20MHC%20DSS%20My%20choices%20-%20screen.pdf)
.

**Make an Enduring Power of Attorney**

Make and register an [ Enduring Power of Attorney
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-
attorney/) . This is a legal arrangement that gives authority to a person you
know and trust, to act on your behalf if you lose the capacity to make certain
decisions in the future. These decisions can be about your personal welfare
and property and money matters. For more information, Safeguarding Ireland has
a leaflet that explains [ how an Enduring Power of Attorney can safeguard your
finances, property and welfare (pdf) ](https://www.safeguardingireland.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/6466-SI-Planning-Ahead-A5-FA-web.pdf) .

**Choose a Health Representative**

Make an [ Advance Healthcare Directive
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-
health/advance-care-directives/) . This arrangement lets you set out your
wishes about healthcare and medical treatment decisions in case you are unable
to make these decisions at some time in the future. You can appoint someone
you know and trust as your designated healthcare representative to ensure your
advance healthcare directive is followed. For more information, the Decision
Support Service has published [ Your guide to an Advance Healthcare Directive
(pdf)
](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/sites/default/files/2023-09/10922%20MHC%20DSS%20Your%20Guide%20to%20an%20Advance%20Healthcare%20Directive%20-%20screen.pdf)
.
