#####  Site updates

The HSE has confirmed that it can no longer assign GPs to [ medical card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) and [ GP visit
card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) applicants
without GP consent. This means the HSE can no longer assign a doctor to you
from the list of participating doctors. We will publish further details when
they become available.

If your child's School Transport Scheme service has not started, you may get
an Exceptional No Service Interim Grant. This is to help with the cost of
transport to school while you are waiting for the [ primary school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-transport-scheme/) , [ post-
primary school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-
transport-scheme/) or [ special needs
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/school-transport-for-children-with-special-
needs/) transport to start. The Department of Education will contact you
directly about the grant.

If you [ came to Ireland from Ukraine ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine/) ,
under the EU Temporary Protection Directive, you will be eligible for an [
Irish Resident Permit (IRP) ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-
residence-in-ireland/registration-of-non-eea-nationals-in-ireland/) card from
the Department of Justice.

If your [ most recent passport ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/passports/renewing-an-irish-passport/) expired more than 15
years ago, you will have to [ apply for a new passport as if you were a first-
time applicant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/passports/applying-for-or-renewing-an-irish-passport/) . If [ your
child’s most recent passport ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/passports/renewing-your-childs-irish-passport/) expired more
than 15 years ago, you will need to apply on their behalf as a [ first-time
child applicant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/passports/passports-for-children/) .

If you change job, you [ no longer need to register your new job or pension
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/changing-job/change-job-tax-prsi/#8eb1b1) with the Jobs and Pensions
section of Revenue’s myAccount service. You only need to register your first-
ever job.

You can get a free flu vaccination until April 2024 [ if you meet certain
criteria ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/vaccinations/flu-vaccination/) .

**New and recently edited**

This page is new:

  * [ Examples of calculating eligibility for GP visit card for under 70s ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/examples-of-calculating-eligibility-for-gp-visit-card-for-under-70s/)

These pages have been reviewed and improved:

  * [ Your childcare options ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/your-childcare-options/)
  * [ Student visas to study in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/student-visas/)
  * [ National Childcare Scheme (NCS) ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/national-childcare-scheme/)
  * [ Immigration rules for full-time non-EEA students ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/immigration-nonEEA-students/)
  * [ First Home Scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/first-home-scheme/)
  * [ Disability payments and the Arts and Disability Connect fund ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-art-council-grants/)
  * [ GP services to medical card holders ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/gp-services-to-medical-card-holders/)
