##  How to apply for permission to remain

This information is about permission to remain for international protection
applicants. You can read about [ residence permissions for non-EEA citizens
](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-
ireland/residence-rights-of-non-eea-nationals-in-ireland/) .

When you [ apply for international protection ](/en/moving-country/asylum-
seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/applying-for-refugee-
status-in-ireland/) , you must complete a questionnaire, and attend interviews
where you give information about your history and your situation. Most of the
information you give is relevant to your application for international
protection.

Some of the information you give becomes more important if your application
for international protection is refused. For example, information you give
about your family in Ireland or any health conditions that you have are
considered by the Minister when deciding if you should get permission to
remain.

After the International Protection Office (IPO) has examined your case, it
makes a recommendation to the Minister for Justice. It recommends one of the
following:

  * You are declared a refugee 
  * You are granted subsidiary protection status 
  * You are not granted international protection 

If the IPO recommends that you should not be granted international protection
(either refugee status or subsidiary protection status), you may [ appeal this
decision ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-
in-ireland/if-your-application-for-refugee-status-is-refused/) to the
International Protection Appeals Tribunal.

The Minister for Justice will then decide if you should be granted permission
to remain. The Minister will make a decision on if you should be granted
permission to remain whether or not you have appealed the International
Protection decision.

The Minister may grant you permission to remain before your international
protection appeal has been completed.
