**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) >
Financial concerns following a death

#  Financial concerns following a death

  * Overview 

[ Money matters after a death ](/en/death/financial-concerns-following-a-
death/money-matters-after-a-death/)

Overview of issues such as social welfare entitlements, tax and other money
matters that may need to be addressed when someone dies.

  * [ Access to money after a death ](/en/death/financial-concerns-following-a-death/access-to-money-after-a-death/)

It can be difficult to get immediate access to a deceased person's money in
Ireland unless it is in a joint account. Find out more here.

  * [ Financial support when someone dies ](/en/death/financial-concerns-following-a-death/financial-support-when-someone-dies/)

Supports are available in Ireland to help families following a bereavement.
Describes certain once-off Health Service Executive (HSE) Area and social
welfare payments. Find out how to apply.

  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)

The Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s Non-Contributory Pension
is payable to widowed people or surviving civil partners without dependent
children who do not qualify for a contributory pension and who pass a means
test.

**This document is in:** [ Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/)

  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)

A Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's contributory pension and
related social welfare benefits may be payable if either the deceased person
or their spouse/civil partner has enough PRSI contributions.

**This document is in:** [ Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/)

  * [ Additional Needs Payment ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/additional-needs-payment/)

Additional Needs Payments are paid to people who have essential and
exceptional needs that they cannot meet out of their weekly income. It can be
paid for funeral costs and fuel bills. You must have a low income.

**This document is in:** [ Supplementary Welfare Schemes ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/)

  * [ Guardian's and orphan's payments ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/)

A Guardian's Payment or Orphan's Pension may be made to a person taking care
of an orphan. In some cases it can be paid directly to the orphan.

**This document is in:** [ Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/)

  * [ Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/)

Information about Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

**This document is in:** [ Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/)

  * [ Income tax credits and reliefs following a death ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/)

An explanation of the tax credits that apply when someone dies and the tax
reliefs for their spouse or civil partner.

**This document is in:** [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

  * [ Capital Acquisitions Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/)

Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT) is a tax on gifts and inheritances. You can get
a certain amount of gifts and inheritances without paying CAT, depending on
your relationship to the person you get them from..

**This document is in:** [ Capital taxes ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/)
