##  Taxes

If you do not pay the tax you owe, Revenue has a range of options for
collecting the tax due. These are set out in detail in the [ Code of Practice
for Revenue Compliance Interventions (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-
professionals/documents/code-of-practice-revenue-compliance-interventions.pdf)
.

The main ways Revenue collects overdue taxes are:

  * Phased payment arrangements 
  * Collection by a Sheriff 
  * Court action 
  * Attachment of a debt 

**Phased payment arrangements**

If you owe money to Revenue for unpaid taxes, you can apply for a phased
payment arrangement where you repay your tax debt in instalments. Interest is
charged on the amount you owe.

If you are paying income tax through Pay As You Earn (PAYE) and you [ underpay
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/paye-overpayments-and-underpayments-of-
tax/) in a particular year, you may be able to repay the amount due by having
your tax credits reduced in a following year. In general, interest is not
applied to these repayments.

**Collection by a Sheriff**

If you get a final demand to pay taxes due and you do not respond, Revenue can
refer your case to a  Sheriff  to enforce the debt. A court order is not
required.

The Sheriff is given a warrant, which is the legal authority to collect
Revenue debts, including by seizing goods if necessary. A warrant is valid for
12 months. However, if the Sheriff does not collect any of the debt within 6
months, the certificate must be returned to Revenue. The Sheriff has the
authority to negotiate a payment arrangement, with you. The repayment
arrangement must be for 2 years or less.

Once your case has gone to the Sheriff, you must then deal with the Sheriff.
You are no longer able to deal with Revenue staff. Revenue Sheriffs are
officers of the courts and are responsible to the courts. There are [ Revenue
Guidelines for Sheriff Enforcement (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-
professionals/tdm/collection/enforcement/sheriff-enforcement.pdf) and a [ Code
of Practice for Revenue Sheriffs (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-
professionals/documents/sheriff.pdf) .

**Court action**

Revenue may take legal action on a debt by referring it to a solicitor.
Revenue will look for a court judgement that the amount is due. Revenue can
then seek further legal action to recover the debt. Revenue has [ Guidelines
for using the court process to pursue tax liabilities (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-
professionals/tdm/collection/enforcement/solicitor-enforcement.pdf) .

**Attachment of a debt**

If Revenue has issued a final demand for tax you owe and you do not agree to
pay it, Revenue has powers of attachment of debt. This means that if you are
owed money, Revenue can require that the money owed to you is paid to Revenue
instead. This could include:

  * Salary from an employer 
  * Money due to you from a state agency 
  * Money in your bank or credit union account 

This does not require a court order.

Revenue has [ Guidelines for Attachment (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-
professionals/tdm/collection/enforcement/attachment.pdf) .
