##  Information and supports

If you are coming from outside Ireland to set up a business you will need
information on a number of topics such as tax and legal requirements. You can
find information about [ starting a business ](/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/) and  being self-employed  on
this website, including details of legal structures and potential liabilities.
You can read about the organisations, websites and publications that can help
you in our document, [ Sources of information on starting a business
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/finding-information-on-
starting-business/) .

[ Businessregulation.ie ](http://www.businessregulation.ie/) is a portal to
help you identify the main regulations which affect your business. If you are
self-employed and your income is reduced you can find out more in our document
on [ self employment and unemployment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/self-employed-and-unemployment/) .

[ IDA (Irish Development Authority) Ireland ](http://www.idaireland.com/) is
an Irish government agency with responsibility for securing new investment
from overseas in manufacturing and internationally traded services sectors. It
can provide information about setting up a business in Ireland and may provide
grants to companies wishing to locate in Ireland or expand their existing
operations in Ireland.

[ Enterprise Ireland ](http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/) is an Irish
government agency which is responsible for the development of Irish industry.
It provides advice and financial support to [ High Potential Start-Up (HPSU)
businesses ](http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/Start-a-Business-in-
Ireland/) . You can find information about [ starting a business in Ireland
](http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/Start-a-Business-in-Ireland/Startups-
from-Outside-Ireland/) on its website.

[ Local Enterprise Offices ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/News-and-
Events/Local-Enterprise-Offices-Open-for-Business.html) provide supports such
as advice and grants to local businesses (10 or fewer employees) that are
starting up or in development. You can find information about their [ training
programmes ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-
Supports/Training-Programmes/) and [ start your own business courses
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-Supports/Training-
Programmes/Start-Your-Own-Business-Programme/) as well as [ mentoring
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-Supports/Mentoring/) and [
financial supports ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-
Supports/Financial-Supports/) on [ localenterprise.ie.
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/)
