##  Does my landlord have to give me arent book?

If you are a tenant living in rented accommodation, you are legally entitled
to a rent book or a similar document that contains the same information. This
applies whether you are renting from a private landlord, an [ approved housing
body ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-
bodies/) , a [ local authority ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/) or an employer.

There are different rules about how the rent book is used depending on how you
pay your rent.

**If you pay your rent in person**

If you pay your rent in person, your landlord must record each payment you
make in the rent book or give you a written receipt with details of the
payment. The rent book entry or receipt must be signed by the landlord and
include the amount paid, the purpose, the date of the payment and the period
it relates to.

**If you pay your rent in another way**

If you pay your rent in another way, for example, by post or electronic funds
transfer (EFT), your landlord must record the payment in your rent book or
give you a written receipt within 3 months of receiving your payment. The rent
book entry or receipt must be signed by the landlord and include the amount
paid, the purpose, the date of the payment and the period it relates to.

If you pay your rent by EFT, you might accept the record of your EFT payments
as a receipt of the payments you’ve made. You and your landlord must agree to
this. However, you should both keep your own records of the payments made in
case there is a dispute.

**Exceptions to the requirement to have a rent book**

If you are [ renting a room in your landlord’s home ](/en/housing/renting-a-
home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/sharing-accommodation-with-your-
landlord/) , your landlord does not have to give you a rent book or a
statement of rent paid. This also applies if you are renting a room from
another tenant in your landlord’s home. This is because these are licence
arrangements, rather than tenancies and the normal landlord and tenant laws do
not apply
