###  Radio licences

The Department of Transport is responsible for issuing radio licences for
boats. The licence lasts for the lifetime of the vessel and costs â‚¬100.

**Merchant ships:** Under the Merchant Shipping (Radio) Rules 1992, every
passenger ship or cargo ship of 300 Gross Tons or above is required to carry a
radio installation in compliance with the requirements of the Global Maritime
Distress and Safety System (GMDSS).

**Fishing vessels:** Under the Merchant Shipping Fishing Vessel (Radio
Installations) Regulations 1998, every registered fishing vessel must carry a
radio installation in compliance with the requirements of the Global Maritime
Distress and Safety System (GMDSS).

The radio installation must be capable of transmitting and receiving different
types of radio communications such as distress alerts and messages, urgency
and safety messages, meteorological information and public correspondence. In
addition, the installation must be capable of transmitting and receiving
locating signals.

The Maritime Radio Affairs Unit (MRAU), which is a unit within the Marine
Survey Office of the Department of Transport is responsible for the
implementation of these Rules and Regulations and is responsible for surveying
and inspecting radio installations and the issuing of Safety Radio
Certificates.

The MRAU may also survey or inspect Foreign Registered vessels and in such
cases, carries out these tasks in accordance with the standards of the [
Safety of Life at Sea Convention (SOLAS)
](https://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/International-Convention-for-
the-Safety-of-Life-at-
Sea-\(SOLAS\),-1974.aspx#:~:text=The%20main%20objective%20of%20the,ships%2C%20compatible%20with%20their%20safety.)
of the [ International Maritime Organization (IMO) ](http://www.imo.org/) .
Where a vessel is found to be contravention of any of the above Rules,
Regulations and standards and the deficiency is deemed by a Radio Surveyor to
have a potentially major impact on the safety of the vessel at sea, the
Surveyor has the power to detain the vessel until such time as the deficiency
is remedied.
