###  Step 2: Find out if your assessable weekly earnings are over the limit

Before you calculate how much JA you can get, you must find out if your weekly
means are more than the maximum JA payment for your situation. The maximum
Jobseeker’s Allowance payment includes the [ personal payment
](http://www.welfare.ie/EN/Publications/sw19/Pages/sw19_sect6.aspx) and any
increases for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) and [ dependent children
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) . If
your _means_ are halved, an increase for a qualified adult is not included in
the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment for your situation and you will only
get a half-rate increase for each qualified child.

In this step you are not calculating the actual amount of JA you will get, you
are just checking to see if you have any possibility of getting JA.

To do this take your assessable weekly earnings from Step 1 and deduct €20 per
day for each day you have worked up to a maximum of €60. Next get 60% of the
balance. This is assessed as your weekly means.

Assessable weekly earnings - €20 = total x 60% = weekly means from work.

**Your means are halved** if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is:

  * Getting a social welfare payment (except Child Benefit, Disablement Pension, [ guardian's payment ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/) , [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) , Domiciliary Care Allowance and [ half-rate Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/) ) 
  * On a [ Further Education and Training (FET) ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-courses/) or VTOS course and getting an allowance in his or her own right. 

If your means are halved because of the above, you will not get an increase
for a qualified adult but you will get a half-rate increase for each qualified
child when finding the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment for your
situation.

**Community Employment:** If you are getting Jobseeker's Allowance and your
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant starts a Community Employment (CE) Scheme
in 2023, the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment will not include an
increase for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) , but it will include a full-rate
increase for each qualified child. Half of your combined means are taken into
account in the means test.

**If your weekly means are less than the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment
for your situation then** **go to Step 3 and start to calculate the actual
amount of JA you will get.**

**Example**  
---  
Jim's assessable weekly earnings are €150 per week. He works 3 days.  €150 -
€60 (3 days) = €90 x 60% = €54  Weekly means from work = €54  In this example,
Jim’s weekly means are below the basic JA payment for his situation. Go to
Step 3.  
  