###  If you get part-time work:

If you get part-time work (defined as less than 30 hours a week) you can keep
your Rent Supplement but your income from work will be assessed against your
Rent Supplement and it may be reduced. The additional household income
disregard (see below) applies to income from part-time work.

The same applies to your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant - any income
he/she gets from part-time work will be assessed against your Rent Supplement
and the Supplement may be reduced.

Additional household income disregard  Some income from part-time employment
and other sources is not taken into account in the means test for Rent
Supplement. _Additional household income_ is income from employment or self-
employment, Working Family Payment, Community Employment, the Tús scheme, the
Rural Social Scheme, Gateway, the Part-time Job Incentive Scheme, Work
Placement Scheme, Back to Work Enterprise Allowance or an approved FET course.
It also includes income above the SWA rate for those on the Skillnets
programme.  Under the additional household income disregard the first €75 per
week of additional household income above the SWA rate for your circumstances
is not taken into account and 25% of additional household income over €75 per
week is not taken into account (there is no upper limit on the 25% that can be
disregarded). A portion of maintenance payments is assessed as additional
household income. Child maintenance payments are not assessed. The first
€95.23 per week of any other maintenance payment is assessable in full and any
amount above this is assessed under the additional household income disregard
(child maintenance payments are not assessed).  You can use our document on [
Calculating Rent Supplement ](calculating_rent_supplement.en.html) to work out
your additional household income disregard.  If you are getting [ Disability
Allowance or Blind Pension and work
](../social_welfare_payments_and_work/disability_payments_and_work.en.html) ,
up to €165 per week of earnings from this employment can be disregarded.
However, this disregard cannot be used with the additional household income
disregard. Only one disregard can be used, whichever is most beneficial.  
---  
  