###  If you or your partner gets full-time work:

In general people working full-time (defined as 30 hours or over a week) are
not eligible for Rent Supplement. Claims from self-employed people are
assessed on the individual circumstances of the case and you may be asked to
show that you are working less than 30 hours a week.

If you get full-time work and you have been accepted as being in need of
accommodation under the [ Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS)
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-scheme/)
by your local authority, you may be able to keep your Rent Supplement
(provided you have been unemployed or not in full-time employment for at least
12 months before you start work). If you are working over 30 hours a week in
self-employment or if you are getting the Back to Work Enterprise Allowance
you must be deemed eligible for the RAS scheme by your local authority to
continue to get Rent Supplement.

However, you will be reassessed for Rent Supplement and your income from work
will be taken into account. As a result of the reassessment you may or may not
continue to qualify for Rent Supplement. If you do qualify for Rent Supplement
you may get a different rate of Supplement. The additional household income
disregard (see below) applies to income from work.

Many people on long-term Rent Supplement are being transferred to the [
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-
renting/housing-assistance-payment/) . You can work full-time and continue to
receive HAP.

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant gets full-time work, your
household is no longer eligible for Rent Supplement. (Note that a non-
dependent household member can work full-time but they must make a minimum
contribution to the rent - see 'If your family circumstances or size changes'
below.)

If you get full-time work and you are not entitled to keep your Rent
Supplement you can continue to get Rent Supplement for up to 30 days after
starting work or until you are paid, whichever is earlier.

People getting Rent Supplement who have a long-term housing need will transfer
to the [ Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-
with-renting/housing-assistance-payment/) . You can work full-time and get
HAP. You can contact the DSP to find out if you can transfer to HAP.
