###  If your family circumstances or size changes:

Every non-dependent adult household member is expected to pay a minimum
contribution to the rent of €30. (A non-dependent household member is anyone
who is not your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant who is working or getting
a social welfare payment in their own right.)

Custom and practice is that the assessable income of the non-dependent
household member (that is, gross income less PRSI and travel costs to work) is
divided by the appropriate rate of SWA for their situation which is then
multiplied by €30 to establish how much they should contribute to the
household's rent.

If the non-dependent household members are a couple their contribution is €40.

When your child turns 18, if they are still in full-time education, there will
be no change to your Rent Supplement. If a child living in the household turns
18 and gets a job or a social welfare payment in their own right they are
expected to pay a minimum contribution of €30. However, if [ benefit and
privilege ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-
social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-supplementary-welfare-
allowance/) has been assessed against their social welfare payment they do not
have to contribute €30.

If a child leaves home your rent must be under the limit for your reduced
family size. (The Rent Supplement limits vary depending on where you live. You
will need to know what the limits are in your local area.)

If you have a new baby or if you adopt or foster a child your family size will
increase so the rent limit that applies to your household may increase. If you
have a large family and you need larger accommodation that costs more than the
rent limits that apply in your area you should discuss your situation with
your local Community Welfare Officer - see ‘How to apply’ below.

The DSP can make additional Rent Supplement payments above rent limits when
necessary. This is done on a case-by-case basis, for both people getting Rent
Supplement and for new applicants.
