##  Rules for collecting debts

Some debts have specific rules and practices in place in relation to how they
are managed and collected. These are mainly debts which are owed to the State
or a State body. In particular, taxes, social welfare overpayments, local
authority rents and housing loans, utility bills and TV licences all have
specific rules and procedures. Find out more about the [ rules for specific
debts ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/) .

There are general rules under consumer credit legislation in relation to [
collecting debts ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debt-collection/) ,
including rules in relation to privacy, contact points and harassment and
intimidation. There is a particular [ code of conduct ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/) for how
lenders must engage with people in mortgage arrears or pre-arrears.

If you do not engage with your lender, your lender will most likely initiate [
legal proceedings to recover the debt ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/court-procedures/) . The case can be taken in the District Court,
Circuit Court or High Court, depending on the amount of money involved. Once
your lender has a Court judgment setting out the debt, this [ judgment can be
enforced in various ways ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) , including, in extreme cases,
through [ bankruptcy proceedings ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/what-is-bankruptcy/) . Being in arrears on
debt repayments can also have other consequences, for example, it can affect
your [ credit record ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/your-credit-history/) and make it difficult to get credit in the
future.

When someone has died, there are detailed rules about [ how their debts must
be dealt with ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debts-after-death/) .

_**Page edited:** 14 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Overview%20of%20problem%20debt&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Overview%20of%20problem%20debt&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))
