##  Getting help from MABS

The [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/mabs-service/) is a free and confidential service for people with
debt problems and money management problems. MABS can help you to explore your
options and deal with your debt in a systematic way. Its website [ mabs.ie
](https://www.mabs.ie/en/) provides information and resources.

You can use the [ My Financial Healthcheck ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-
financial-healthcheck/) tool as a starting point to find the right
information, advice and support.

**Managing your money:** MABS can help you manage your money and stay on top
of your bills. You can [ use the MyBudget tool ](http://mabs.ie/money-
tools/my-budget/) to help you make a budget plan. There are also [ tips on
managing your money ](https://mabs.ie/managing-money/) to make your money go
further.

**Dealing with creditors:** MABS has agreed a protocol with the Banking and
Payments Federation of Ireland (BPFI). The lenders that have signed up to the
protocol have committed to work with MABS money advisers to help customers
with their debt problems and agree a sustainable plan of repayments. The [
protocol between MABS and BPFI (pdf) ](https://bpfi.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/BPFI_MABS_Operational_Protocol_May2023.pdf) allows for
write-off of some debt, at the lender’s discretion.

MABS can also help you to agree a sustainable repayment plan with your other
creditors that have not signed up to the protocol.

**Accessing personal insolvency options:** All MABS services are registered as
Approved Intermediaries with the Insolvency Service of Ireland (ISI) and can
bring you through the process of getting a [ Debt Relief Notice ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-notices/) if
this is an appropriate solution for you. MABS can also advise you on how to
access the other personal insolvency options – see below.

**Dealing with mortgage arrears:** MABS has Dedicated Mortgage Arrears (DMA)
advisers that can give you independent expert advice if you have difficulty
with mortgage arrears. DMA advisers can help you find out what type of
financial, insolvency or legal services you need and help you to access them.

MABS is involved in providing free support to people with mortgage arrears, as
part of the [ Abhaile ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-
mortgage-arrears-support/) scheme. [ Abhaile can offer financial and legal
support and advice ](https://mabs.ie/abhaile/about-abhaile/) .

**Contacting MABS:** You can call the MABS Helpline on 0818 07 2000 from 9am
to 8pm, Monday to Friday. You can also [ request a callback
](https://mabs.ie/contact/call-back/) , email [ helpline@mabs.ie
](mailto:helpline@mabs.ie) or make an appointment to meet a money adviser in
person in one of the nationwide [ network of MABS offices
](https://mabs.ie/about/find-a-mabs-office) .
