##  Bye-election posters

You must have advance permission of the owner of the pole or structure to hang
posters and signs in public places.

Under the [ Litter Pollution Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0012/index.html) , as amended
by [ Section 9 of the Electoral (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 2009
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2009/en/act/pub/0009/sec0009.html) , election
posters and signs cannot be erected until an order has been made appointing
the polling date for the bye-election or for 30 days prior to the date of the
poll (whichever is the shorter period). [ Local authorities ](/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/local-and-regional-government/functions-of-
local-authorities/) have the power to remove these items should they
disintegrate or cause a litter nuisance.

Following a bye-election, a party or candidate  must remove posters  within a
7-day period  . After that date, an on-the-spot fine of €150 is issued by your
local authority in respect of each remaining poster. Your local authority will
remove the poster as the fine is issued.

If a party or candidate has been issued with a fine and refuses to pay, they
can be prosecuted in the [ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/) by your local authority to enforce payment. The
maximum penalty in the District Court following conviction for non-payment of
the fine is €4,000.

A person convicted of a litter offence may also be required by the court to
pay the local authority’s costs and expenses in investigating the offence and
bringing the prosecution, as well as the costs of clearing up the litter.

_**Page edited:** 30 April 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/by-
elections-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Bye-
elections&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/by-
elections-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/by-
elections-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Bye-
elections&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/by-
elections-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
