##  Rules for satisfying the habitual residence condition

**Who decides whether an applicant is habitually resident?**

Statutorily appointed Deciding Officers (or Determining Officers in the case
of Supplementary Welfare Allowance) determine whether you meet the requirement
to be habitually resident in the State.

The Officer will rely on the evidence you provide and be guided by national
and EU law and guidelines when making their decision. When the Officer makes a
decision on whether a person is habitually resident they must follow a series
of steps:

**1\. Check whether you are a person who is not regarded as being habitually
resident in the State**

For example, asylum seekers are not regarded as habitually resident. You can
find out more about [ who is not regarded as habitually resident in the
Operational Guidelines ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fc9c5e-operational-
guidelines-for-deciding-officers-on-the-determination-of/) .

**2\. Check whether you are exempt from the habitual residence condition**

Certain people, in particular EEA nationals who are considered migrant
workers, are exempt from the habitual residence condition (see also
**Exemption from the habitual residence condition** above). You can find out
more about [ who is exempt from the habitual residence condition in the
Operational Guidelines.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fc9c5e-operational-guidelines-for-
deciding-officers-on-the-determination-of/)

**3\. Check whether a previous habitual residence decision has been given or
if the case is under appeal**

A [ previous decision on habitual residence
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fc9c5e-operational-guidelines-for-
deciding-officers-on-the-determination-of/) should carry through to subsequent
claims unless there has been a significant change in circumstances since a new
application was made.

**4\. Consider whether the person has a right to reside in the State**

If you do not have [ a legal right of residence in this State
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fc9c5e-operational-guidelines-for-
deciding-officers-on-the-determination-of/) , you will not be regarded as
habitually resident. The following groups of people have a right to reside in
Ireland:

  * Irish nationals 
  * UK nationals living in the [ Common Travel Area (CTA) ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/)
  * EEA nationals who are employed or self-employed in Ireland 
  * EEA nationals who have been employed here for over a year and are now unemployed, provided they are registered as jobseekers with the Department of Social Protection 
  * EEA nationals, who have been employed here for less than a year and are now unemployed, may stay for another 6 months provided they are registered as jobseekers with the Department of Social Protection 
  * EEA nationals who can support themselves, their spouse/civil partner and any accompanying dependents and who have comprehensive sickness insurance 
  * EEA nationals who are visitors or jobseekers can stay for up to 3 months provided that they do not become a burden on the social welfare system of the State during that period (as determined by the Department of Justice - [ SI 656 of 2006 (pdf) ](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/SI656of2006.pdf/Files/SI656of2006.pdf) ) 
  * Non-EEA nationals with an employment permit that allows them to legally reside and work in the State. A person with permission to reside will have the [ appropriate immigration stamp ](http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Pages/Stamps) in their passport and either a Certificate of Registration issued by the Garda National Immigration Bureau (GNIB) (a GNIB card) or an [ Irish Residence Permit (IRP) ](http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Pages/irish-residence-permit) . 
  * Asylum seekers who have been granted permission to remain 

The _resident spouse or civil partner and/or dependants_ of a person with
refugee status or of a non-EEA national with an employment permit normally
hold the same habitual residence status as that of the sponsor. These family
members should be treated as habitually resident as long as they and the
sponsor retain permission to be in the State.

**5\. Examine the 5 factors to determine habitual residence**

Once your right to reside has been established the following 5 factors (which
have been set down in Irish and European law) are examined to find out if you
are habitually resident in Ireland:

  * Length and continuity of residence in Ireland 
  * Length and purpose of any absence from Ireland 
  * Nature and pattern of employment 
  * Your main centre of interest 
  * Your future intentions to live in Ireland as it appears from the evidence 

You can find out more [ about the 5 factors in the Operational Guidelines
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Habitual-Residence-Condition--Guidelines-for-
Deciding-Offic.aspx) on the Department of Social Protection's website. The
Department has also published [ a supplement to the Guidelines with scenarios
which show how the habitual residence condition is applied in practice
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Habitual-Residence-Condition-HRC-Guidelines
---Supplement.aspx) .
