###  Getting Jobseeker's Allowance before 26 September 2007

If you were getting Jobseeker's Allowance before 26 September 2007 and you
were still in payment on 26 September, your income and your spouse's, civil
partner's or cohabitant's income will be assessed using both the old means
test and the new means test. You will get the higher amount. (The old means
test is the means test used before 26 September 2007. The new means test is
used on JA applications recieved after 26 September 2007).

If you would get a greater amount of JA on the previous assessment then you
will continue to be assessed using the previous method of calculating means
from employment.

If you stop claiming Jobseeker's Allowance for more than 4 weeks you cannot
apply the old method of calculating means from employment. If the first time
you stop claiming JA is for less than 4 weeks, the second time you stop
claiming Jobseeker's Allowance (even if it is for less than 4 weeks) you will
be assessed using the new assessment only. This means, if you want to be
assessed using the previous method you are only allowed one break in your
claim of less than 4 weeks

**Before 26 September 2007 your spouse's, civil partner's or cohabitant's
income from employment affected your JA payment as follows:**

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant works and earns less than €100
gross per week, you are entitled to a full increase for him/her as a qualified
adult. A reduced [ qualified adult allowance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-
in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) is paid if his/her
earnings are between €100 and €310. If your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant earns more than €310, you will not be paid any increase for
him/her. If you have a child dependant and you are getting a [ child dependant
increase ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/)
in your payment, this portion is halved if your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant earns more than €310.

In summary:

**Spouse, civil partner or cohabitant works** |  **Take home pay** |  **Your payment**  
---|---|---  
1,2 or 3 days  |  €50  |  No change   
1,2 or 3 days  |  More than €50  |  Any earnings over this amount are halved and deducted from your payment   
4 or more days  |  €100  |  No change   
4 or more days  |  More than €100  |  Any earnings over this amount are halved and deducted from your payment   
  
  
Your spouse's, civil partner's or cohabitant's income can also affect your
payment. [ Read more about how your spouse's, civil partner's or cohabitant's
income from employment is assessed as means and possibly affect your
Jobseeker's Allowance. ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-
test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/)

Your average weekly net earnings are used to calculate your means. This is
usually established by calculating your average earning over the previous 13
weeks (or another period if this is more representative of your normal working
pattern). When assessing your income from employment the following allowances
are always deducted from your gross earnings to get your net earnings.

  * [ PRSI (Contribution) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/)
  * Union dues 
  * Reasonable travel expenses 
  * Superannuation or contribution to a private health insurance fund 

How your income from employment is assessed depends on whether you have child
dependants.

If you have one or more qualified child dependants and you are working part of
the week while claiming JA, your means are assessed as 60% of your average net
weekly earnings.

If you do not have qualified child dependants, €12.70 euro of your earnings
for each day worked are not taken into account and disregarded from your
average net weekly earnings. Only 60% of the balance is assessed against the
weekly rate of JA.

A person is entitled to JA only for periods of unemployment. The minimum
period a person must be unemployed in order to receive JA is 3 days in a
period of 6 consecutive days.
