##  How to make a complaint

If you have a complaint or dispute, you should first [ complain to the
provider ](https://www.fspo.ie/make-a-complaint/how-to-make-a-complaint-to-
your-provider/pensions-provider/) . It should have a complaints handling
process called an Internal Disputes Resolution (IDR) procedure.

The FSPO cannot investigate the complaint or dispute until it has gone through
that procedure and a final response is issued.

You must give the pensions provider 40 working days to respond to your
complaint. If they do not resolve your complaint, they must give you a final
response letter, setting out the steps they have taken.

After 40 working days, if your complaint has not been resolved and you have
not received a final response letter, you can then ask the FSPO to follow up
on your behalf to get a final response letter.

**If your complaint to the provider is not resolved**

If you are not satisfied with the outcome when you get the final response
letter, you can refer your complaint back to the FSPO. They will then [ deal
with the complaint either informally (using mediation) or formally
](https://www.fspo.ie/our-services/) .

There is a [ standard complaint form ](https://www.fspo.ie/complaint-
form.aspx) that you must use to make your complaint to the FSPO. You can
either complete the form online or you can contact the FSPO for a complaint
form to send by post. The FSPO has a short [ video guide on the steps to take
to make a complaint ](https://www.fspo.ie/make-a-complaint/how-to-make-a-
complaint-to-the-fspo/) .

You should enclose copies of all relevant documents and correspondence,
including any correspondence with your pension scheme, employer or
administrator.

**Decision of the FSPO**

The FSPO will review the information submitted by both parties and make a
decision.

If it upholds a complaint, it may direct the pension provider to rectify the
problem or pay you compensation, or both.

If it does not uphold your complaint, it will not direct any action.

The FSPO's decision is binding on you and the pension provider and can only be
appealed to the High Court.
