###  Third-party services on citizensinformation.ie

The citizensinformation.ie website uses Google Analytics, Google Tag Manager,
Google Maps and Matomo.

This website uses Google Analytics to collect information about how visitors
to citizensinformation.ie use the website. We have set up the Google Analytics
service with [ advanced privacy protections
](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6245164?hl=en&ref_topic=2919631)
so that Google will not retain your full IP address and does not have
permission to share any data collected. There is more information on Google
Analytics in our 'Cookies policy'. We will ask for your consent before we set
Google Analytics cookies and we do not capture information about your visit
via Google Analytics if you do not grant this consent.

We use Google Tag Manager to customise some of the data that is sent to Google
Analytics. We use Google Tag Manager to track how far users scroll down a
page. We do this to see whether the content is meeting user needs.

When you look for a Citizens Information Centre on [
centres.citizensinformation.ie ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) ,
many of the pages include an option to load a map generated by Google. If you
choose to load a map generated by Google, Google may gather information in
rendering the map, including your IP address, web browser version, operating
system and similar.

Google may store data on servers outside the European Union or European
Economic Area. We have ensured appropriate safeguards are in place to protect
the privacy and integrity of this data.

You can find Google's Privacy Policy at [ https://policies.google.com/privacy.
](https://policies.google.com/privacy)

We also use software called [ Matomo ](https://matomo.org/gdpr-analytics/) to
collect information about how visitors to citizensinformation.ie use the
website. Matomo is hosted on a Citizens Information Board server.
