##  What should I do if I am involved in a motor collision?

**Decide whether to move the cars:** If the collision is serious, do not move
the cars. If the collision is minor and the cars are blocking the road or are
a danger to other road users, mark their position on the road and then move
them. Take care when moving damaged cars and be alert to the danger of leaking
fuel.

**Warn other drivers:**

  * Try to warn oncoming traffic of the accident. You can warn them by using your hazard lights. 
  * If you have a reflective advance-warning triangle, place it on the road far enough from the scene of the collision to give enough warning to approaching traffic. 
  * If the collision happens near a bend in the road, make sure you give warning to traffic on both sides of the bend. 

If you need another road user’s help to warn traffic, do so immediately.

**Call for help:** If someone is injured, call the [ Gardaí ](/en/justice/law-
enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/) (telephone 999 or 112) and,
if necessary, ambulance services.

**Get information:** You should get the information listed above (under
‘Provide information’) from the other drivers involved in the collision. If
the collision involves property damage, get the owner’s name, address and
telephone number.

**Get the witnesses names** , **addresses and telephone numbers** , as these
may be needed if a question of liability arises.

**Photos:** Take photos of the scene of the collision if you have a camera.
These should include photos of the vehicles before they are moved.

**Garda details:** You should get the name or number of the Garda to whom the
collision is reported. You may need to ensure that a Garda report has been
filed for insurance purposes.

**Write down what happened:** You should write down an account of all relevant
facts connected to the collision as soon as possible afterwards. Sign and date
your account (including the time) when it is completed.

**Uninsured or unidentified cars:** If you want to claim compensation where
you are involved in an accident with an uninsured or unidentified car, contact
the [ Motor Insurer's Bureau of Ireland (MIBI) ](http://www.mibi.ie/) . MIBI
also deals with claims from foreign drivers in Ireland or Irish drivers
abroad.

**More information:** For more advice on what to do at the scene of an
accident, see the [ Rules of the Road (pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-
source/road-safety/rules-of-the-road.pdf?sfvrsn=e0334acb_0) .
