###  Tenancy Tribunal

The Tenancy Tribunal is the second stage of the RTB's dispute resolution
service. The Tribunal is made up of 3 people from the RTBâ€™s Dispute Resolution
Committee. A dispute can be referred to the Tenancy Tribunal for any of the
following reasons:

  * If an agreement cannot be reached using mediation 
  * If either party wants to appeal an adjudicator's decision 
  * If any of the parties request a Tribunal hearing 
  * If the RTB refers the dispute directly to the Tribunal, for example, where there appears to be imminent risk of damage to the property or danger to the parties involved 

If your case is to be heard by the Tribunal, the RTB will notify you at least
21 days before the hearing. They will tell you the date, time and purpose of
the hearing. You can submit additional evidence about your case to the RTB
before the Tribunal hearing.

Tenancy Tribunal hearings are mainly held online. However, the RTB can
schedule face-to-face hearings, if needed. At the hearing you will have the
chance to present your case. The hearing is not formal and you can have a
family member or friend with you, if you like. Legal representation is not
needed at hearings, but you can arrange to have it if you want. Tenancy
Tribunal hearings are open to the public and the RTB has [ Guidelines for
Members of the Public Attending a Hearing (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/general/Guidelines_for_Public_Attending_a_Hearing_%282%29.pdf)
. The RTB also has information on [ Tribunal Procedures (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/general/RTB_Tribunal_Procedures_Virtual_Hearings.pdf)
, as well as a [ Guide to Virtual Dispute Resolution Hearings (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/general/Guide_to_Virtual_Dispute_Resolution_Hearings_%284%29.pdf)
to help you with the process.

The Tribunal will hear your dispute and make a decision on it based on the
evidence. The decision of the Tenancy Tribunal is issued to all parties as a
determination order of the RTB and is legally binding. You can view [
determination orders on the RTB website ](https://www.rtb.ie/dispute-case-
outcomes) . Tribunal decisions can only be appealed to the [ High Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) on a point of law and the appeal must
be lodged within 21 days. Read more about [ making an appeal to a Tenancy
Tribunal on the RTB website ](https://www.rtb.ie/dispute-resolution/tribunals)
.
