###  How does the Micro-generation Support Scheme work?

If you don’t have solar panels already, you can [ apply for a solar PV grant
](/ga/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-
improvements/grants-for-solar-panels/) to help with the cost of getting them.

You must tell ESB Networks that you plan to install solar panels. You can do
this by completing a [ NC6 form (pdf)
](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-source/publications/6-e02835310-esb-
nc-form_dec_22_nc6_final-v.pdf?sfvrsn=e5b30164_11) or a [ NC7 form (pdf)
](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-source/publications/esbn_form-
nc7_dec21.pdf?sfvrsn=3e05b9bc_19) , depending on the size of your
microgeneration system. You can fill the form in yourself or with the help of
the person who installed your system.

You should use the [ NC6 form (pdf) ](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-
source/publications/6-e02835310-esb-nc-
form_dec_22_nc6_final-v.pdf?sfvrsn=e5b30164_11) if your microgeneration system
is:

  * Single phase electricity and less than 6kW 
  * 3 phase electricity and less than 11kW 

You should use the [ NC7 form (pdf) ](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-
source/publications/esbn_form-nc7_dec21.pdf?sfvrsn=3e05b9bc_19) if your
microgeneration system is:

  * Single phase electricity and between 6kW to 50kW 
  * 3 phase electricity and between 11kW to 50kW 

When ESB Networks has processed your form, they will let your energy supplier
know that you have installed a microgeneration system. If you have a smart
meter installed, your energy supplier will know already.

When your solar panels are installed and connected, they will generate
electricity. This will lower the cost of your electricity bills.

When your solar panels produce more electricity than you use, you can sell the
excess back to the grid through your electricity supplier.

**How is my electricity measured?**

If you have a smart meter, this will measure the exact amount of electricity
you use and sell. This is automatically recorded every half an hour by your
smart meter.

If you don’t have a smart meter, but you qualify for one, you will not be paid
for the electricity you sell until your smart meter has been installed.
Payments will begin once your smart meter is installed and your NC6 or NC7
form has been processed.

If you don’t have a smart meter and don’t yet qualify for one, you will be
paid based on a deemed volume assumption. This is calculated by ESB Networks
using a formula set by the Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU).
