###  The problem of conflict of laws

If all the parties to a family law dispute are from one country and are living
in that country then generally the dispute is heard by the courts of that
country, and a decision is made and implemented in accordance with the laws of
that country. Problems arise when the parties are not living in the same
country or are not nationals of the same country. It may not be clear which
country’s courts should make the decisions, which country’s laws should be
applied and how the decisions made in one country can be implemented in
another.

Each country has its own rules about how these conflicts of laws should be
dealt with. It is possible that several countries would have jurisdiction to
hear the dispute and that each would apply different laws. The procedures for
having judgments recognised and enforced in another country can be difficult
and sometimes impossible. Generally, if you have a judgment from a court in
one country, you have to go through another judicial process in another
country in order to have it implemented there.

These problems arise between all countries and not only between EU member
states. A number of international conventions have been agreed dealing with
such conflicts of laws. These international conventions continue to apply
between EU member states and non-EU member states. The EU regulations in
family law matters apply in all the EU member states except Denmark which has
opted out. So if there is a conflict of laws involving Denmark and another EU
member state, the matter is governed by the international conventions if they
are relevant.

Within the EU, there has been a simplified process for implementing certain
judgments and orders from one EU member state in another. An even more
streamlined process within the EU now applies to many orders relating to
matrimonial matters and parental responsibility which were made in proceedings
which started on or after 1 August 2022.
