##  How to apply

If you are the **primary claimant** , you can claim the SPCCC online using the
Revenue [ myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) service. You
can also claim the credit by completing [ Form SPCC1 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/documents/spcc1.pdf) and sending it to Revenue.

If you pay tax under the self-assessment system, you claim the SPCCC through [
Revenue Online Service (ROS) ](https://www.ros.ie/) on your Income Tax Return
(Form 11).

You cannot surrender the SPCCC to a **secondary claimant** online. You must
use [ Form SPCC1 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/documents/spcc1.pdf) .

If the primary claimant has given up their claim, you can claim SPCCC as a
secondary claimant by completing [ Form SPCC2 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/documents/spcc2.pdf) .

If you believe you qualify as the primary claimant but the credit has been
granted automatically to another person, you should complete [ Form SPCC1
(pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/documents/spcc1.pdf) and submit it to your Revenue office. You
should also include any relevant evidence in support of your claim that the
child lives with you for the whole or greater part of the year. The decision
on who is the primary claimant will be made on the facts in the case. If there
is a dispute you can appeal Revenue's determination to the Appeal
Commissioners.

Remember that, for a secondary claimant to make a claim, in all cases the
primary claimant must have surrendered their entitlement to the credit. There
is no obligation on the primary claimant to give up the SPCCC.

[ More information about the Single Person Child Carer Credit is available on
Revenue's website ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/children/single-person-child-carer-credit/index.aspx) .
