**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) >
Families and children

#  Families and children

  * Overview 

[ Payments to families and children ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/payments-to-families-and-children/)

Gives a short description of the social welfare benefits available to families
and children.

  * [ Parent's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/)

Parent’s Benefit is a payment for people who are on parent’s leave from work
and covered by social insurance (PRSI). Each parent gets 9 weeks payment in
the first 2 years after the child’s birth or adoption.

  * [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)

Working Family Payment is a weekly tax-free payment to people on low pay. You
must have at least one child to qualify.

  * [ Back to Work Family Dividend ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/back-to-work-family-dividend/)

The Back to Work Family Dividend is a weekly payment to help people with
children move from social welfare into work.

  * [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)

Maternity Benefit is a payment by the Department of Social Protection to women
on maternity leave from work. Find out more about Maternity Benefit and how to
apply.

  * [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/)

Paternity Benefit is a payment that is made to a person who is on paternity
leave from work and covered by social insurance (PRSI).

  * [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/)

Child Benefit is a monthly payment to all parents or guardians of children
under 16, or under 19 if the child is in full-time education or has a
disability.

  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)

One-Parent Family Payment is a payment for people who are bringing children up
without the support of a partner.

  * [ Transition from One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/moving-from-ofp/)

The age limit for One-Parent Family Payment (OFP) reduced to 7 years in July
2015. People who no longer qualify for OFP because their youngest child is
over the age limit may be eligible for other income supports. This document
outlines your options.

  * [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/)

Adoptive Benefit is a payment made to people on adoptive leave from work. Find
out how to apply and rates of benefit.

  * [ Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/)

A summary of Health and Safety Benefit for pregnant or breastfeeding women.

  * [ Pregnancy and social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

  * [ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/)

The Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance (BSCFA) is paid each year
to families on certain social welfare payments and other benefits. It helps
with the cost of going to school.

  * [ Deserted Wife's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/)

Deserted Wife’s Benefit is a social insurance payment made to women who were
deserted by their husbands. This payment closed to new applicants in January
1997. Some women, however, continue to get a deserted wife's payment.

  * [ Deserted Wife's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wifes-allowance/)

Deserted Wife’s Allowance is a means-tested payment for women under 66 without
dependent children who were deserted by their husband and who do not qualify
for Deserted Wife’s Benefit.
