###  Next steps

When the AI is satisfied that you are eligible for a Debt Relief Notice and
that all the information you have provided is complete and accurate, they will
sign a statement saying so. The AI will then send your application, including
all the details of your financial affairs and your debts, to the Insolvency
Service to have a DRN approved.

When considering your application, the Insolvency Service can ask the AI for
further information and can enquire into anything it considers relevant to
verify the completeness and accuracy of your application. It can request
information about your bank accounts, assets, liabilities, employment and
income, and the law states that anyone asked for such information (your bank,
employer etc.) “shall furnish the information requested as soon as
practicable”.

Government departments, the Revenue Commissioners and other State bodies can
also provide relevant information to the ISI about your financial
circumstances.

The ISI will issue a certificate that your application is in order and notify
the Circuit Court. The court will review the application and documentation
and, if satisfied that the conditions are met, will issue a Debt Relief
Notice.

The Court will notify the Insolvency Service, the AI, yourself and the
relevant creditor(s) of the DRN. The DRN will relate to specific debts and
specific creditors. You may well have other debts that are not covered by the
DRN and those creditors are not affected by it. The Insolvency Service will
publish details of the DRN on the Register of Debt Relief Notices, which is
accessible to the public.
