##  Pregnancy and jobseeker's payments

If you are pregnant, and claiming Jobseeker’s Benefit or Jobseeker's
Allowance, you can continue to get your payment. You are considered capable of
work unless you have complications during your pregnancy, or you are ill.

You must be available for and genuinely seeking work to get a jobseeker's
payment. This means that you must continue to look for work throughout your
pregnancy.

You do not have to sign-on at your local Social Welfare or Intreo office 4
weeks before your baby is due to be born and for 8 weeks after the birth. You
also do not have to prove that you are seeking work. You must tell your Intreo
Centre or local Social Welfare Branch Office about your pregnancy.

Your Jobseeker’s Benefit will only be paid for the number of weeks remaining
on your claim. If you no longer qualify for Jobseeker’s Benefit, you can apply
for Jobseeker’s Allowance. The rules for Jobseeker's Allowance are similar to
Jobseeker's Benefit but you will have to pass a means test.

**Increase for a qualified child**

When your baby is born, you may qualify for an increase in your Jobseeker’s
Benefit or Allowance for your child. If you are parenting alone, you may
qualify for the One-Parent Family Payment.

**What if I am unemployed but don't qualify for a jobseeker's payment because
of illness during pregnancy?**

If you are sick or ill during your pregnancy you are not entitled to
Jobseeker's Allowance or Jobseeker's Benefit.

You may get Illness Benefit if you have worked and have enough social
insurance contributions (see below). If you are not entitled to Illness
Benefit and your illness is expected to last for more than 12 months you may
be entitled to [ Disability Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) .

If you are pregnant and either not getting a social welfare payment or not
entitled to any of the above social welfare payments, you may get some
financial support under the [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-
scheme/) .
