###  Services for persons with a disability/National Disability Strategy  

Budget changes affecting people with disabilities are made in the context of
the National Disability Strategy which promotes greater co-operation between
departments in the planning and delivery of services for people with
disabilities.  
  
**Social welfare**  
New maximum rate of Disability Allowance and Blind Pension: €185.80 per week
(January 2007)  
  
Entitlement to the full rate of Disability Allowance extended to all qualified
persons resident in institutions (January 2007)  
  
The amount of capital disregarded from the means test for Disability Allowance
increases from €20,000 to €50,000 (June 2007)  
  
Invalidity Pension increased to €191.30 (aged under 65).  
  
Occupational Injuries Benefits Disablement Pension increases to €216.90 per
week  
  
Respite Care Grant increases to €1,500 ( June 2007)  
  
**Tax  
** Incapacitated Child Tax Credit increases to €3,000 (January 2007)  
  
Blind Person's Tax Credit increases to €1,720 (single) and €3,520 (married,
both spouses blind).  
  
There are to be improvements in the administration of claims for tax refunds
for medical expenses.  
  
**Funding  
** Additional funds of €1.9 million are provided to Comhairle for the
development of personal advocacy service for persons with a disability and for
the implementation of the Department of Social and Family Affairs’ Disability
Sectoral Plan.  
  
A 10% increase in funding over the 2006 level was included in the 2007
Estimates for Services for Persons with a Disability/National Disability
Strategy. Most of this money is allocated to the health sector. Budget 2007
provides a further €100 million for health-related disability and mental
health services. This will provide additional residential, respite and day
places, and other service improvements. It will also support the introduction
of Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005, which provides for assessments of need
and service statements for people with disabilities. These provisions will
start for children aged under 5 years with effect from 1 June 2007.  
  
The funding will also support the continued implementation of ‘A Vision for
Change’, the plan for mental health services,  
  
Once-off grant for Special Olympics Ireland of €2 million.  
  
Funding of €500,000 for carer’s organisations.  
