##  Jobseeker's Allowance

[ Jobseeker's Allowance (JA) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-allowance/) is a weekly payment from DSP to jobseeker's. To
get Jobseeker’s Allowance you must be [ habitually resident ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) and pass a [ means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test-for-
jobseekers-allowance/) . If you are self-employed, you may be entitled to
Jobseeker's Allowance depending on your earnings from your business. You do
not need to close your business or stop working as self-employed for you to
get Jobseeker’s Allowance and you don't have to be unemployed for at least 4
out of 7 days, as for Jobseeker's Benefit. You will get Jobseeker’s Allowance
if your income is below a certain level.

**Income from self-employment and the means test**  
The earnings from your business will be assessed in the means test for
Jobseeker’s Allowance. The assessment must reflect the income you may
reasonably be expected to get from your business over the next 12 months.
Income for the last 12 months will be taken as a guide but allowing for any
factors which it is known will vary. You should be prepared to discuss these
factors when you are assessed for Jobseeker’s Allowance.

Earnings are assessed as gross income less work-related expenses over 12
months. Your expected annual earnings from self-employment is divided by 52 to
find your weekly means from self-employment. Any ‘drawings’ you take from the
business is not an allowable expense. If your ‘drawings’ from the business are
greater than the level of income calculated, the ‘drawings’ are assessed as
cash income. There is no exhaustive list of all business expenses allowed
because expenses vary with the nature and extent of the self-employment.
However the following are the main allowable expenses in most cases:

  * Materials (supplies costs) 
  * Motor running costs (portion applicable to business) 
  * Depreciation of machinery or equipment 
  * Insurance relating to the business 
  * Telephone (portion applicable to business) 
  * Lighting and heating (for business and not domestic use) 
  * Advertising 
  * Bank charges 
  * Stationery 
  * Van leasing 
  * Any other costs associated with running the business (household running costs are not allowed as deductions against business profit) 

To prove the level of income from your business you must give your receipts
and payments (documentation showing money coming in and out of your business)
or audited accounts to the person dealing with your application in your Intreo
Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office.

**When you apply for Jobseeker’s Allowance**  
Usually, you will be asked for your receipts and payments or audited accounts
for the current and previous year. For example, if you apply for Jobseeker's
Allowance in April 2023 you will be asked for your receipts and payments from
January to April 2023 and for 2022. However, in certain cases you may be
required to show audited accounts for the last two or more years. Find out
more about [ signing on for a jobseeker’s payment ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/signing-on/) .

You may qualify for Supplementary Welfare Allowance while you are waiting to
be assessed for a jobseeker’s payment or if you don’t qualify for a
jobseeker’s payment.  
