##  Legal and other supports

The [ Family Mediation Service ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/) offers a free service to
help separating couples co-operate with each other to work out mutually
acceptable arrangements. Tusla - the Child and Family Agency funds [ voluntary
organisations that provide marriage and relationship counselling
](http://www.tusla.ie/services/family-community-support/counselling/) .

The [ Mediators' Institute of Ireland ](http://www.themii.ie/) can provide a
list of private accredited mediators.

[ Legal aid and advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-
and-legal-aid/) is available from the [ Legal Aid Board ](/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) in family law cases to people who satisfy a
means test and whose case is considered to have merit. If you want to engage
the services of a [ solicitor ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) privately,
the [ Law Society of Ireland ](http://www.lawsociety.ie/) maintains a [ list
of solicitor firms throughout the country ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-
Solicitor/) .

[ FLAC ](http://www.flac.ie/) is an independent, voluntary organisation that
operates a network of legal advice clinics throughout the country. These
clinics are confidential, free of charge and open to all. Contact [ your
nearest Citizens Information Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/)
for information on FLAC services in your area.

_**Page edited:** 14 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Breakdown%20of%20a%20marriage%20or%20other%20relationship&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Breakdown%20of%20a%20marriage%20or%20other%20relationship&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
