##  Legislation

The rights of parents to guardianship are set down in [ Section 6
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1964_0007.htm#SEC6)
of the [ Guardianship of Infants Act 1964
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1964_0007.htm)
as amended. Guardianship rights entitle a parent to make important decisions
regarding that child's upbringing, for example, deciding on the child's
religion, education, medical treatment and where they lives.

A father who is not married to the mother of his child does not have automatic
guardianship rights in relation to that child. If the mother agrees for him to
be legally appointed guardian, they must sign a joint statutory declaration.
The [ statutory declaration (SI 210 of 2020) (pdf)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/si/210/made/en/pdf) must be signed
in the presence of a [ Peace Commissioner ](/en/justice/civil-law/peace-
commissioners/) or a [ Commissioner for Oaths ](/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/) . If there is more than one child, a separate
statutory declaration should be made for each. You can apply for guardianship
up until a child reaches 18 years of age.

The [ Children and Family Relationships Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2015/en/act/pub/0009/index.html) provided for
a number of [ changes to the Guardianship of Infants Act 1964
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/PR16000018) . For example, an unmarried
father will automatically be a guardian if he has lived with the child's
mother for 12 consecutive months after 18 January 2016, including at least 3
months with the mother and child following the child's birth. If there is
disagreement as to whether they have been cohabiting for the required length
of time, an [ application for the necessary declaration
](https://www.courts.ie/guardianship-custody-and-access) can be made to the
court.
