##  What to consider before applying for planning permission

Before you apply for planning permission, there any many things to consider,
such as what type of planning permission you’ll need and if your plans fit
with the development plan for your area.

**Types of planning permission**

You need to apply for planning permission for most developments on your land
or property.

This includes most:

  * Building and demolition work 
  * Alterations to land or buildings 
  * Significant changes to the use of land or buildings 

However, you may not need [ planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-permission/) for smaller developments and minor changes to
your home. For example, you do not need planning permission for small
extensions or when converting your garage or shed. There are [ specific
conditions ](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission-for-altering-
a-house/) for these exemptions.

There are two different types of [ planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-permission/) :

  * **Permission:** This is when the local authority agrees to your work. It lasts for 5 years. 
  * **Outline permission:** This is when you have an initial plan and want to see if the local authority agrees to it in principle. 

The local authority may grant permission with conditions. This means you may
have to make changes to your designs in order to get approval.

**Planning permission to clear a site**

If you need to clear a site before building can begin building, you will need
planning permission to:

  * Make or widen an access onto a public road 
  * Demolish a structure that was last used as a home 
  * Demolish a building in a terrace 
  * Demolish a building that is attached to another building not owned by you 
  * Demolish a protected structure 

**Your local authority's local development plan**

Always review your [ local development plan ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/development-plans/) before you apply for planning permission. A
development plan describes how your local authority plans to develop
particular parts of the local authority area where you live (for example,
residential areas, industrial areas, agricultural areas).

Your local authority can tell you if your plans are likely to fit-in with the
[ local development plan ](/en/housing/planning-permission/development-plans/)
. You can discuss your plans with them and they can advise you on the planning
permission process and any particular conditions for building in the area.

For example, you can only build a home in some rural areas, if you have an
association with the area. This is known as local needs. The local authority
will be able to advise you on these conditions.

**Do your research with the Office of the Planning Regulator**

The [ Office of the Planning Regulator ](https://www.opr.ie/) publishes very
helpful information in:

  * [ Doing Work around the House – The Planning Issues (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-8-A-Guide-to-Doing-Work-Around-the-House.pdf)
  * [ A Guide to Planning Permission (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-3-A-Guide-to-Planning-Permission.pdf)
  * [ A Guide to Making a Planning Application (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-4-A-Guide-to-Making-a-Planning-Application.pdf)

For more information on applying for planning permission and the different
types of planning permission, see [ Planning permission
](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission/) .
