###  PRSI (social insurance) contribution

Paternity Benefit is paid by the Department of Social Protection to people who
have a certain number of paid PRSI contributions on their social insurance
record. The PRSI contributions can be from both employment and self-
employment. The PRSI classes that count for Paternity Benefit are A, E, H and
S (self-employed). Members of the Defence Forces who pay PRSI at Class H are
insured for Paternity Benefit but it is not payable while they are in service.

Time spent on the [ COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP) ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-payment/) and the [
COVID-19 Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) ](/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-scheme/) will be treated as if you are
continuing to make insurance contributions at your normal social insurance
class.

**If you are an employee** you must have:

  * At least 39 weeks PRSI paid in the 12-month period before the first day of your paternity leave. 

Or

  * At least 39 weeks PRSI paid since first starting work and at least 39 weeks PRSI paid or credited in the relevant tax year or in the tax year immediately following the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on paternity leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022 and the year following that is 2023. 

Or

  * At least 26 weeks PRSI paid in the relevant tax year and at least 26 weeks PRSI paid in the tax year immediately before the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on paternity leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022 and the year before that is 2021. 

If you do not meet these PRSI conditions and you were self-employed before
starting work as an employee, you can use your Class S contributions to
qualify for Paternity Benefit - see PRSI conditions for self-employed people
below.

You are awarded [ credited contributions or credits ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-
insurance-contributions/) automatically when you are getting Paternity
Benefit. Credits are awarded at the same rate as your last paid contribution.
These credits help protect your future entitlement to social welfare benefits
and pensions.

If you were previously insurably employed in a country covered by EU
Regulations, you may combine your insurance record in that country with your
Irish PRSI contributions to help you qualify for Paternity Benefit in Ireland.
You must be currently in insurable employment in Ireland and have paid your
most recent PRSI contribution in Ireland. More information is available in our
document about [ combining your social insurance contributions from abroad
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) .

**If you are self-employed** you must be in insurable employment and have:

  * 52 weeks PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on paternity leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022. 

Or

  * 52 weeks PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the tax year immediately before the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on paternity leave in 2024, the tax year immediately before the relevant tax year is 2021. 

Or

  * 52 weeks PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the tax year immediately following the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on paternity leave in 2024, the tax year immediately following the relevant tax year is 2023. 

If you do not meet these PRSI conditions and you were in insurable employment
before becoming self-employed, you can use your PRSI contributions (Class A, E
and H) in that employment to qualify for Paternity Benefit – see PRSI
conditions for employed people above.

If you are in insurable self-employment, you are not awarded credited
contributions or credits automatically when you are getting Paternity Benefit.
A self-employed person is not specifically excluded from employment credits.
You may qualify for credits if you meet the conditions. For example, an
applicant for Paternity Benefit who is now self-employed but had been employed
in 2021 would qualify for credits. If they have been only self-employed,
without being employed, for the last 3 years they won’t qualify for credits.
