###  Leave certification

All employees must have their paternity leave certified by their employer. If
you are self-employed you self-certify your leave.

You must notify your employer that you intend to take paternity leave and of
your intended dates no later than 4 weeks before your leave.

If you're an employee, you must notify your employer that you intend to take
paternity leave and of your intended dates no later than 4 weeks before your
leave. You must provide your employer with proof of the expected date of
confinement of your spouse or partner. In other words, you will be required to
provide your employer with a certificate from your spouse or partner's doctor
confirming when your baby is due, or confirmation of the babyâ€™s actual date of
birth if you apply for leave after the birth has occurred. Your employer must
then complete a [ form PB2: Employer Certificate for Paternity Benefit (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/10312/a293b948613c41edaeb84ae4396725e3.pdf) to confirm
that you are entitled to paternity leave.

If you're self-employed, a doctor must complete a [ form PB3: Medical
Certificate for Paternity Benefit (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/10313/4a7cef3662634402bfd5f44cc071941e.pdf) to certify
the expected due date of your baby (or the baby's date of birth). This is to
confirm that you are entitled to paternity leave.

In the case of adoption, you must produce a certificate of placement in
relation to the child.

In the case of an intercountry adoption that took place outside the State, you
must produce a declaration of eligibility and suitability in relation to the
child and particulars in writing of the day of placement or expected day of
placement.

If at any stage you decide not to take your paternity leave, you cannot be
paid Paternity Benefit. You should inform the Paternity Benefit section of the
Department of Social Protection of any changes to your paternity leave
arrangements.
