###  Payments for dependants

If you have dependants, your rate of Paternity Benefit (excluding increases
for dependants) is compared to the rate of Illness Benefit (including
increases for dependants) that would be paid to you if you were absent from
work through illness. The higher of the 2 rates is paid to you.

Although the Illness Benefit rate begins from a lower personal base amount
(€232 is the maximum Illness Benefit personal rate), it also takes into
account extra payments for your family. This is why, depending on the
circumstances of your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant and how many
children you have, the rate paid to you may be greater than the rate you would
otherwise be entitled to.

**Example (2024 rates):**

John is entitled to the standard Paternity Benefit rate of €274. His partner
is unemployed and signing on for [ unemployment credits ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-
insurance-contributions/) . They have two children under 12 years of age.

If he got [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/illness-benefit/) he would get €478 (this is the personal rate of
Illness Benefit + an Increase for a Qualified Adult + Increases for 2
Qualified Children under 12). He cannot get less Paternity Benefit than he
would get if ill and getting Illness Benefit. For this reason, he will get
Paternity Benefit of €478.

If your adult dependant is getting a social welfare payment you will not get
an [ Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-
social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) but you may get a half-rate [
Increase for a Qualified Child (IQC) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-
your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) .

You will qualify for a full-rate IQA and a full-rate IQC, if your adult
dependant is unemployed and signing on for credits or is earning under €100.01
per week.

If your adult dependant is earning between €100.01 and €310 per week you will
get a tapered rate of IQA and a full-rate IQC. If your adult dependant is
earning between €310.01 and €400 per week you will not get an IQA but you will
get half rate IQC. If your adult dependant earns over €400 per week you will
not get an IQA or IQC.
