##  Rules

**Deserted Wife's Benefit** is a payment made to a woman deserted by her
husband. Entitlement to the payment is based on social insurance contributions
paid by the woman or her husband.

The Benefit closed to new applications in January 1997. Some women have
continued to get Deserted Wife’s Benefit because they qualified for the
payment before 2 January 1997 and continue to meet the qualifying criteria
which include:

  * You must not have earnings of more than €20,000 per year (this applies only to claims for Deserted Wife's Benefit made on or after 31 August 1992) 
  * You must not be cohabiting with any person 
  * You have not resumed living with your husband 

You can find more information about the [ rules for keeping for your Deserted
Wife’s Benefit ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/072474-operational-
guidelines-deserted-wifes-benefit/) .

If you have transferred from Deserted Wife’s Benefit to One-Parent Family
Payment to be accepted as a participant on a Community Employment Scheme, you
can apply to have your entitlement to Deserted Wife's Benefit restored. The
maximum weekly rate of payment for Deserted Wife’s Benefit is higher than the
maximum weekly rate of One-Parent Family Payment. If you qualify to have your
entitlement to Deserted Wife’s Benefit restored, you may also be due arrears.

Women getting Deserted Wife’s Benefit can apply for and transfer to the [
State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-contributory/) when they reach 66.

If you are currently getting a reduced rate of Deserted Wife's Benefit, but
have been working, then you may qualify for a higher rate of [ State Pension
(Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-
contributory/) , based on your own PRSI contributions, when you reach 66.
However, if you do not qualify for the State Pension (Contributory) when you
reach 66, you will automatically get a higher rate of Deserted Wife's Benefit
(see 'Rates' below).
