##  More information on how to adapt your home

The [ Disabled Living Foundation (DLF) ](https://livingmadeeasy.org.uk/dlf-
factsheets) in the UK publishes factsheets on some of the equipment available
to help with daily living. These provide advice on adapting your home and
information on daily living equipment such as features to look for when
choosing equipment.

The [ Age Friendly Homes website ](https://agefriendlyhomes.ie/) provides
information for older people on housing. It includes information on adapting
an existing home, new accessible homes, housing grants, housing design as well
as housing policy and research.

If you are visually impaired, deaf or hard of hearing, organisations such as [
Vision Ireland ](https://vi.ie/) (previously known as the National Council for
the Blind in Ireland) and [ Chime ](https://www.chime.ie/) , the National
Charity for Deafness and Hearing Loss (previously known as DeafHear.ie) offer
advice on what you can do to make your home safer and more suitable for you.

[ Age Action ](http://www.ageaction.ie/) provides services, support, advice
and information specifically for older people.

The [ Irish Wheelchair Association ](http://www.iwa.ie/) can provide
information and advice on changes to make your home more wheelchair-friendly.
The IWA has also published [ Best Practice Access Guidelines: Designing
Accessible Environments ](https://www.iwa.ie/access-guidelines/best-practice-
access-guidelines-4/) which has technical details on how to build or create an
accessible environment.

The [ National Disability Authority ](https://nda.ie/) also has a set of
guidelines on accessibility, called [ Building for Everyone
](http://universaldesign.ie/Built-Environment/Building-for-Everyone/) . These
guidelines show how buildings can be designed, built and managed so that they
are accessible to everyone.

_**Page edited:** 15 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/building-
or-altering-a-home/adapting-a-home-for-an-older-or-disabled-
person/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Adapting%20a%20home%20for%20an%20older%20or%20disabled%20person&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/building-
or-altering-a-home/adapting-a-home-for-an-older-or-disabled-
person/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/building-
or-altering-a-home/adapting-a-home-for-an-older-or-disabled-
person/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Adapting%20a%20home%20for%20an%20older%20or%20disabled%20person&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/building-
or-altering-a-home/adapting-a-home-for-an-older-or-disabled-
person/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
