##  Employing family members and PRSI

Most employees are liable to pay PRSI. Exceptions to this general rule apply
in the case of certain f _amily employment_ . This term is used to describe a
situation in which a self-employed sole trader either employs, or is assisted
in the running of the business by a specified family member(s). If the
business does not operate on a sole trader basis - for example if it is a
limited company or a partnership - it is not _family employment_ .

The following categories of _family employment_ are insurable under the social
insurance system in exactly the same way as employments that have no family
connection:

  * If you are employed as an employee by a _prescribed relative_ and the employment is not related to a private dwelling house or a farm in or on which both you and the employer live (PRSI Class A or Class J applies). 
  * If you are employed as an apprentice by a _prescribed relative_ (even if the apprenticeship employment relates to a private dwelling house or a farm in or on which both you and the employer resides) there must be a registered contract of apprenticeship involved (PRSI Class A or Class J applies). 
  * If you assist your spouse or civil partner in the running of the family business but are not an employee (PRSI Class S applies) 

**A** **_prescribed relative_ ** **is a parent, grandparent, stepparent, son,
daughter, grandson, granddaughter, stepson, stepdaughter, brother, sister,
half-brother, or half-sister.**

The following categories of _family employment_ are the exceptions that are
not covered by the social insurance system:

  * A spouse or civil partner employed by their self-employed spouse or civil partner 
  * If you are employed as an employee by a _prescribed relative_ and the family employment relates to a private dwelling house or a farm in or on which both you and the employer reside 
  * If you assist or participate in the running of the family business but not as an employee. (For example, a son/daughter who is attending full-time education who participates in the business after school hours but is not an employee.) 

Before 2014, spouses and civil partners of self-employed sole traders who
worked in the business (either as an employee or in another capacity) were not
liable for PRSI. Since 2014, certain spouses and civil partners of self-
employed sole traders can pay PRSI and therefore establish entitlements to
benefits in their own right. People affected by this change are people who
work in their self-employed spouse or civil partner’s business doing similar
or ancillary (supporting) tasks but who are not business partners or
employees. The €5,000 income threshold applies to these spouses or civil
partners in the same way as other self-employed people, so if a spouse or
civil partner earns less than this threshold they are not liable to pay PRSI.

If two or more family members (including spouses or civil partners) operate a
business as a partnership and share the profits each business partner is
insurable as a self-employed contributor (provided they earn over the €5,000
threshold).

[ Read more about family employment. ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Family-
Employments-that-Are-Covered-for-Social-Insurance-PR.aspx)

**Points to note:  
** PRSI Class M is used to record situations in which there is no liability to
social insurance.

Subject to certain conditions, if you are no longer covered by compulsory
PRSI, you can choose to pay [ voluntary contributions ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-
contributions/) .
