##  What if I can’t find alternative accommodation?

If your landlord has asked you to leave and you can’t find alternative
accommodation, you can contact organisations such as [ Threshold
](https://threshold.ie/get-help/) or [ Focus Ireland
](https://www.focusireland.ie/contact-us/) for advice. They can check if your
Notice of Termination is valid and help you with the next steps.

If you find yourself homeless or you think you may lose your home, you should
generally contact your local authority to access accommodation. There are [
supports available for people who are homeless ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-
and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/) and [ agencies that can help
](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/)
.

If your landlord is selling your rental property, you may be able to access
supports announced when the [ eviction ban ](https://www.rtb.ie/new-changes-
to-rental-legislation/residential-tenancies-deferment-of-termination-dates-of-
certain-tenancies-act-2022) ended on 31 March 2023.

**Social housing tenants renting from private landlords**

If you are a social housing tenant and your private landlord wants to sell the
home you are renting, the local authority can buy the home and you can
continue to rent it from the local authority instead. This is known as the
Tenant in Situ Scheme. It is aimed at people who are getting the [ Housing
Assistance Payment ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/housing-
assistance-payment/) or are part of the [ Rental Accommodation Scheme
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-scheme/)
and whose landlords are leaving the rental market. You should contact your [
local authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/)
for more information about this scheme.

**Private tenants who want to buy their rented home**

If you are renting privately and your landlord wants to sell your rental home,
your landlord will have to offer to sell it to you first. This is known as
First Right of Refusal. This measure is not available yet. It needs
legislation to bring it into effect.

Your landlord can still sell you the home you are renting, if they want to and
you can afford to buy it. You can use the [ First Home Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/first-home-scheme/) and the [ Local Authority Home Loan
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/local-authority-mortgages/) to help with the cost of buying your
rental home. These schemes have been adapted so people in this situation can
access them.

**Private tenants at risk of homelessness**

If you can’t afford to buy your rental home, or you don’t want to buy it, the
[ Housing Agency ](https://www.housingagency.ie/) can buy the home and rent it
to you. You can access this scheme if you are a private tenant who has
received a notice of termination and you are at risk of homelessness because
your landlord is selling. This is a temporary scheme known as the [ Cost
Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/cost-rental-
tenant-in-situ-scheme/) . You should contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) about this
scheme. They will assess what supports you qualify for and give your details
to the Housing Agency, if this scheme is suitable for you.

For more information on supports for private tenants at risk of homelessness,
see our pages on:

  * [ Housing and other supports for homeless people ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)
  * [ Agencies providing services for homeless people ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/)
