**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > Retiring to Ireland

#  Retiring to Ireland

  * Overview 

[ Returning home to Ireland to retire ](/en/returning-to-ireland/retiring-to-
ireland/retiring-to-ireland-as-a-returning-irish-emigrant/)

This page has information on housing, social welfare, pensions, work and tax
for returning Irish emigrants who want to retire in Ireland.

  * [ Occupational pensions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/occupational-pensions/)

Occupational pensions are organised by employers to provide pensions to one or
more employees on retirement. What are the rules about occupational pension
schemes?

**This document is in:** [ Pensions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/)

  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)

The State Pension (Contributory), previously called the Old Age (Contributory)
Pension, is payable to people aged 66 and over who have worked and paid enough
social insurance contributions.

**This document is in:** [ Payments for older and retired people ](/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/)

  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)

The State Pension (Non-Contributory), previously called the Old Age Non-
Contributory Pension, is a means-tested payment for people in Ireland aged 66
and over.

**This document is in:** [ Payments for older and retired people ](/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/)

  * [ GP visit cards ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/)

Unless you have a medical card or GP visit card, visits to family doctors are
not free. What is a GP visit card and how can you apply?

**This document is in:** [ Medical cards and GP visit cards
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/)

  * [ Housing for older people ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/older-people-housing/)

Schemes and grants for housing and home improvements for older people.

**This document is in:** [ Housing supports for older people and people with
disabilities ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-
older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/)

  * [ Free travel in Ireland ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/)

Everyone aged 66 and over living permanently in Ireland is entitled to travel
free of charge on public transport. People under 66 on certain social welfare
payments are also entitled to free travel. Find out more about free travel in
Ireland and the Senior SmartPass which allows you to travel for free on public
transport in Northern Ireland.

**This document is in:** [ Extra social welfare benefits ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/)

  * [ Working in retirement ](/en/employment/retirement/older-people-and-working/working-in-retirement/)

The effects of working in retirement on social welfare benefits, entitlement
to pensions and employee protective legislation

**This document is in:** [ Older people and working
](/en/employment/retirement/older-people-and-working/)

  * [ Tax credits and reliefs for people over 65 ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

There are some tax reliefs specifically for people aged over 65. This page
also gives an overview of other tax reliefs that may be relevant.

**This document is in:** [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)
