##  How to apply for a deer hunting licence

For the 2024-2025 season, you apply online to renew or apply for a deer
hunting licence through the [ licensing portal
](https://portal.heritage.gov.ie/en-US/SignIn) . To get your licence in time
for the new season, you must apply before the end of June. The licence will be
issued in August.

You must [ register for the portal
](https://www.npws.ie/sites/default/files/files/registering-for-heritage-
licensing-portal.pdf) and create a profile. To do this, you must have a:

  * Valid email address 
  * Mobile phone number 
  * Digital photograph 

If you have a [ MyGov.ID ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/egovernment/mygovid/) you can use this to log into the portal.

If you have a query about registering on the portal, you can email [
heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie ](mailto:heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie)

If you are renewing a licence, you must provide information about the deer you
shot last season, called your deer returns. You can find out more about [
renewing a licence (pdf)
](https://www.npws.ie/sites/default/files/files/submitting-a-deer-hunting-
licence-renewal-application.pdf) .

If you are applying for a licence for the first time, you must provide
relevant information such as:

  * Firearms certificate details 
  * Certification of deer hunting training 

If you are coming from abroad and you do not have an Irish firearms
certificate, you should upload an EU Firearms Pass or the equivalent from your
country of origin to satisfy the requirement to hold a licence to own and
operate a firearm. These will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis during the
application assessment.

The National Parks and Wildlife Service will examine your application,
together with the landowner's permission. Incomplete applications are not
considered.

If your licence is approved, you get a digital licence. A copy of the licence
is emailed to you and is also available on the [ portal
](https://portal.heritage.gov.ie/en-US/SignIn) .

**Updates**

During the year, you can update your details on the portal and add details of
the deer you shot (deer returns).

**Queries about licences**

If you have a deer hunting licence query, you can call 01 888 3242 or email [
deerlicences@npws.gov.ie ](mailto:deerlicences@npws.gov.ie) . If you have a
query about registering on the portal, you can email [
heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie ](mailto:heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie)
.

The NPWS has published [ frequently asked questions (FAQs) about deer hunting
licences (pdf) ](https://www.npws.ie/sites/default/files/files/deer-hunting-
licence-application-faqs.pdf) .

You can get [ further information on applying for a licence from npws.ie
](http://www.npws.ie/licences/hunting/deer-hunting-licences) .
