###  Income from work

To qualify for a means-tested payment your income from various sources is
examined to see whether it is under a certain level. Some earnings from work
are not taken into account in the assessment of your means and do not affect
your payment. For Disability Allowance and Blind Pension, earnings of up to
€165 from work (either as an employee or as a self-employed person) are not
taken into account at all in the assessment of means. (The means assessed are
your gross earnings less PRSI, any pension contributions and any union dues.
You cannot deduct income tax or income levies.)

If you earn more than €165 per week from work, half of your earnings between
€165 and €375 are not taken into account in the Disability Allowance and Blind
Pension means test.

**Disability Allowance:** all earnings from work over €375 are assessed as
income and your entitlement to Disability Allowance will be reduced in line
with the [ appropriate reduced rates of payment for Disability Allowance
](https://assets.gov.ie/11117/6beb1ad2f51346f4ad6f27db1c473e59.pdf) . If you
are getting payments for a qualified adult or qualified children your means
from work are deducted from the family rate that applies to you.

**Blind Pension:** all earnings from work over €375 are assessed as income and
your entitlement to Blind Pension will be reduced in line with the [
appropriate reduced rates of payment for Blind Pension.
](https://assets.gov.ie/11117/6beb1ad2f51346f4ad6f27db1c473e59.pdf)

There is no restriction on the number of hours you can work.

**Social insurance payments:** [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) and [ Illness Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/) are social
insurance (PRSI-based) payments. You cannot work while you are getting these
payments (with the exception of [ voluntary unpaid work ](/en/social-
welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-payments/) ).

If you have been getting Invalidity Pension or Illness Benefit (for at least 6
months) you can apply for [ Partial Capacity Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/partial-capacity-benefit/) , if you have a
reduced capacity to work. The work does not have to be rehabilitative. You may
have to pay [ income tax ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)
on your total income. Exemptions for rehabilitative work are no longer
available.
