**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Pensions
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/) > Personal Retirement Savings
Account (PRSA)

#  Personal Retirement Savings Account (PRSA)

  * What is a PRSA? 
  * Who can get a PRSA? 
  * Types of PRSA 
  * Do you need a PRSA? 
  * PRSA contributions 
  * How to apply 
  * Complaints 
  * Further information 

##  What is a PRSA?

A Personal Retirement Savings Account (PRSA) is a type of long-term personal
pension plan. It is like an investment account that is designed to let you
save for retirement in a flexible way.

Your PRSA is a contract between you and a PRSA provider in the form of an
investment account. You can change employment and continue to use the same
PRSA and you can switch from one PRSA to another at any time, free of charge.

You can get [ tax relief ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/tax-
relief-on-pensions/) for the contributions you pay into your PRSA.

When you retire, you have the same options with a PRSA as with other personal
pensions – read about [ options on retirement for personal pensions
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/personal-pensions/#l0bad0) .

##  Who can get a PRSA?

Most people can get a PRSA but they can be especially useful if you have no
other pension arrangement. Employers that do not have an [ occupational
pension scheme ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/occupational-
pensions/) for their employees must provide access to at least one Standard
PRSA. Employees who are not entitled to join a pension scheme within 6 months
of service must be given access to a PRSA by their employer. [ Read more about
employers' obligations and PRSAs (pdf)
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/en/prsa_providers/prsas/prsas%20-%20a%20consumer%20and%20employer's%20guide.pdf)
.

##  Types of PRSA

There are two types of PRSA:

  * Standard PRSA 
  * Non-Standard PRSA 

The main differences are:

  * The charges are capped for standard PRSAs but not for non-standard PRSAs 
  * Types of investment are restricted in standard PRSAs but not in non-standard PRSAs 

You can read more about the differences between Standard and Non-Standard
PRSAs in [ A consumer and employer's guide to PRSAs (pdf)
](https://pensionsauthority.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/prsas_-
_a_consumer_and_employers_guide.pdf) produced by the Pensions Authority.

Standard PRSAs are likely to meet the needs of most people. The level of
charges on your account is important to consider, as the charges imposed
reduce the fund you can build up. On your retirement, the size of your fund
will depend on your contributions and the investment performance less any
charges. It is not possible to predict investment performance.

Charges on Non-Standard PRSAs are not capped and in most cases, are higher
than Standard PRSAs. If you are considering a Non-Standard PRSA, ask for a
full explanation of the differences between this product and the Standard
product. You should beware of promises of better returns on Non-Standard PRSA
products as predicting investment performance is extremely difficult.

###  Investment of your money

Standard PRSAs invest only in pooled funds where the risk is spread across a
large number and variety of investments. Non-Standard PRSAs can offer wider
investment choices. However, you need to be sure that you understand the
investment choices and the reasons why you should choose them. If you do not
understand how your pension will be invested, then you should consider if this
product is best for you.

You should also be sure that you can afford the monthly payment suggested and
that this is the most effective payment for [ tax relief ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/) .

You should get a report on investment performance every 6 months.

You should get a statement of reasonable projection every year showing the
estimated benefits at retirement you could expect, based on certain
assumptions.

##  Do you need a PRSA?

If you are considering whether to invest in a PRSA, you should ask yourself
the following questions.

**Is there an existing pension scheme available to me in my job?**

If not, you should consider making provision for your retirement and a PRSA
may be the option for you. If you already have a good pension arrangement, you
may not need to make any additional provision, or you may be able to top up
your benefits by making Additional Voluntary Contributions (AVCs). If there is
no AVC facility, your employer must provide access to a PRSA.

**Should I start a PRSA if I already have a personal pension plan?**

You should seek professional advice based on your circumstances. Contact a
broker or your pension provider for more information.

**Do I need a PRSA if I already have a defined benefit scheme?**

Defined benefit pension schemes promise a pension related to your salary (for
example, two-thirds of final salary on retirement). You may not need to make
any further pension provisions if you have this type of pension. Transferring
from a defined benefit scheme into a PRSA involves a risk so you will need to
assess your financial position and weigh up the advantages and disadvantages.

**Do I need a PRSA if I have a defined contribution scheme?**

A defined contribution scheme is also based on investment and has an
investment risk - your pension will depend on the contributions you make,
together with the investment performance of your fund, less any charges. If
your employer is making a contribution to your existing scheme, you should
find out whether this will continue if you transfer to a PRSA.

##  PRSA contributions

PRSA providers cannot require a minimum contribution of over:

  * €300 a year 
  * €10 for each electronic transaction 
  * €50 for each other transaction 

You can stop, start, increase and decrease your contributions at any time,
without charge. However, a PRSA provider may require notice of a change.

Contributions received by PRSA providers must be held in a custodian account.

You should get a statement of account every 6 months showing your
contributions (and any by your employer) and the transfer value of your PRSA.

Contributions to PRSAs are disregarded from assessment in [ means-tested
social welfare schemes ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-
test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) except Supplementary Welfare
Schemes.

##  How to apply

If your employer does not operate an occupational pension scheme, or if
certain restrictions apply to the scheme it does offer, your employer must
provide access to at least one Standard PRSA. T

This rule applies to all employers, regardless of the number of employees and
whether they are full-time, part-time, fixed-term or contract.

Contact the HR manager or Payroll Section at your employment to find out more
about the Standard PRSA(s) they provide.

##  Complaints

The [ Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/) can investigate and decide on
complaints, concerning disputes of fact or law and errors in relation to
occupational pension schemes and PRSAs. The Ombudsman can give any directions
necessary to resolve the complaint or dispute and can give financial
compensation. This financial compensation cannot be more than the actual loss
of benefit under the complainant’s occupational pension scheme or PRSA. The
Ombudsman does not have the power to award legal costs. All decisions made by
the Ombudsman are binding between the parties but can be appealed to the [
High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) .

You can read more about [ making a complaint about your pension ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/) .

##  Further information

The Pensions Authority publishes [ A consumer and employers’ guide to PRSAs
(pdf) ](https://pensionsauthority.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/prsas_-
_a_consumer_and_employers_guide.pdf) .

The [ Pensions Authority ](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie) and [ Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie) are jointly responsible for approving PRSA products
in Ireland. The Pensions Authority supervises the activities of PRSA providers
in relation to their approved products and monitors compliance with the
legislation about PRSAs. The Pensions Authority also keeps a [ register of
PRSA providers and their products
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/en/PRSA_Providers/PRSAs/) .

###  Pensions Authority

Verschoyle House  
28-30 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 613 1900

**Homepage:** [ https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@pensionsauthority.ie ](mailto:info@pensionsauthority.ie)

_**Page edited:** 25 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/personal-retirement-savings-
accounts/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Personal%20Retirement%20Savings%20Account%20%28PRSA%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/personal-retirement-savings-
accounts/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/pensions/personal-retirement-savings-
accounts/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Personal%20Retirement%20Savings%20Account%20%28PRSA%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/personal-retirement-savings-
accounts/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Illness in your retirement_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/becoming-seriously-ill/)

Payments and services available to support older people who become ill or
acquire a disability. Information on income supports, health care, housing,
taxation and caring for someone else.

1560.0547

  * [ _Working in retirement_ ](/en/employment/retirement/older-people-and-working/working-in-retirement/)

The effects of working in retirement on social welfare benefits, entitlement
to pensions and employee protective legislation

1529.6483

  * [ _Early retirement_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/early-retirement/)

Entitlements to state payments of people who retire early, whether through
redundancy or by choosing early retirement and the measures they should take
to ensure they retain entitlement to long-term pensions

1444.3076

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

