**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for older people
](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/) > Home Support
Service

#  Home Support Service

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

###  What is the Home Support Service?

The Health Service Executive (HSE) provides [ community care
](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/community-care-services/)
and home care supports at local level, including the Home Support Service.
This service was previously known as the Home Care Package Scheme.

The Home Support Service helps older people to continue living in their own
homes for as long as possible. For example, it can provide support with
everyday tasks such as getting in and out of bed, bathing and dressing.

A personâ€™s individual needs are assessed to decide what supports they need.
These supports will be provided by the HSE or by an external provider,
approved by the HSE.

###  Who can apply for the Home Support Service?

The Home Support Service is available to people aged 65 or over who may need
support to continue living at home or to return home following a hospital
stay. The services might be needed due to illness, disability or after a stay
in hospital or following rehabilitation in a nursing home.

In some cases, the service may be available to people younger than 65 who need
support. For example, people with early onset dementia or a disability.

###  What does the Home Support Service cost?

There is no charge for the service and the scheme is not means tested. You do
not need to have a medical card to apply for the Home Support Service.

##  Rules

###  How does the Home Support Service work?

The supports are provided by the HSE, or else by an external provider that is
approved by the HSE.

If you are approved for the service and HSE staff are not available, an
external [ provider approved by the HSE ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/home-support-
services/choosing-an-approved-provider/) will deliver the home support to you.
The HSE can arrange this service on your behalf. You deal directly with the
approved provider of your choice to arrange the days and times for the
support.

Alternatively, you can request to deal directly with an approved provider. If
you are approved, the HSE will write to you to tell you the weekly amount of
funding you can use to arrange home support from your chosen provider. This
approach is called Consumer Directed Home Support (CDHS). The number of hours
of home support that the funding provides depends on the rates charged by the
provider. The provider will tell you what rates they have agreed with the HSE.

You can request Consumer Directed Home Support when you apply. Whether your
services are CDHS or are arranged by the HSE, you can choose to change to the
other approach if you wish.

###  What services will I get?

The services that are provided vary, depending on individual needs. For
example, they may include help with everyday tasks such as getting in and out
of bed, bathing and dressing. When you apply, the HSE arranges an assessment
of the kinds of support you may need. This is called the Care Needs
Assessment.

The HSE will occasionally review the services you are receiving and may
increase or decrease the supports you are getting, depending on your care
needs, or the supports may remain the same. If your situation changes, you
must notify the local HSE Home Support Office if this affects your need for
home support.

###  What is the Care Needs Assessment?

When you apply, the HSE will assess your health care needs and social
circumstances. The assessment will identify the level of care that you
currently receive and what other supports you may need.

The assessment will be done by a healthcare professional such as a public
health nurse or physiotherapist.

The HSE will write to you to let you know what decision is made about the
supports you need.

If you are not satisfied with the decision, you can write to the HSE Home
Support Office in your area to state this and your reasons. You can do this
within 20 days of receiving the decision. An impartial review of the decision
will be undertaken and you will be informed of the outcome of this review.

##  How to apply

To get an application form, [ contact your local Home Support Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/home-support-services/contact-your-local-home-
support-office/contact-your-local-home-support-office.html) or [ download the
application form and information booklet for the Home Support Service (pdf).
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/home-support-services/home-support-services-
information-booklet.pdf)

Staff in your local office can help you if have questions or need help filling
in the form.

You can complete the application form yourself or you can ask someone to
complete it for you, for example, a family carer, GP or public health nurse.
If someone else is completing the form for you, you must sign the Declaration
and Consent section in Part 1 of the application form.

If you are in hospital, you should ask the person dealing with your discharge
plan about applying. This person might be a nurse, a discharge coordinator or
a social worker. They will help you with the application form and send it to
your local HSE Home Support Office.

If you would like to be considered for CDHS, tick the box for this on the
application form.

Return the completed application form to [ your local Home Support Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/home-support-services/contact-your-local-home-
support-office/contact-your-local-home-support-office.html) .

_**Page edited:** 29 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/home-support-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Home%20Support%20Service&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/home-support-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/home-support-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Home%20Support%20Service&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/home-support-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Long-Stay Contributions for Residential Support Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/long-stay-contributions/)

If your accommodation or your daily living costs are provided by the Health
Service Executive (HSE), or on behalf of the HSE, you may have to pay a Long-
Stay Contribution towards these maintenance and accommodation costs.

1480.997

  * [ _Housing and other supports for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)

Housing and other supports for homeless people.

1419.0316

  * [ _Agencies providing services for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/)

Organisations providing services to people who find themselves without a home.

1302.0125

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

