**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Farming and managing land ](/en/environment/land/) > Farming education, grants
and supports

#  Farming education, grants and supports

  * Introduction 
  * Teagasc farming courses 
  * Farming apprenticeships 
  * Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant Scheme 
  * Student Grant Scheme 
  * More information on farm education and training 

##  Introduction

There are a variety of courses available if you are interested in farming, or
are already farming and want to upskill or learn about a new area.

You may also need to complete a farming course to access some farming schemes
and payments, such as the [ Organic Farming Scheme
](/en/environment/land/organic-farming-scheme/) .

Many farming courses are run by [ Teagasc ](https://www.teagasc.ie/) while
others are run by [ third-level colleges
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) , sometimes in
partnership with Teagasc.

There are grants and schemes available to help you with the cost of studying.

There are also a number of apprenticeships available if you are interested in
getting practical experience in farming.

You may choose to work on a farm as a [ seasonal worker
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/different-types-of-workers/#4ba463) , for example, during the
summer holidays. This can be a useful way of getting experience in farming
before signing up to a course or apprenticeship.

##  Teagasc farming courses

Teagasc provide [ QQI ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/colleges-and-qualifications/fet-qualifications/#828dc6) level
5 and 6 further education courses at their colleges and local centres. The
courses cover different farming topics such as:

  * [ Agricultural mechanisation ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/agricultural-mechanisation/)
  * [ Crops and machinery management ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/crops--machinery/)
  * [ Dairy herd management ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/dairy/)
  * [ Drystock herd management ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/drystock/)
  * [ Equine studies ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/equine/)
  * [ Forestry ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/forestry/)
  * [ Horticulture ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/horticulture/)
  * [ Pig management ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/pigs/)
  * [ Poultry management ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/poultry/)

They also run higher level courses in partnership with third-level colleges.

You can find a [ full list of these courses on the Teagasc website
](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/) .

They also run [ adult and continuing education courses
](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/courses/#continuing) and [ food industry
development training ](https://www.teagasc.ie/food/research-and-
innovation/research-areas/food-industry-development/specialist-training/food-
industry-training/) .

Teagasc has their own [ student maintenance grant scheme
](https://control.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
education-grants-and-supports/#902b22) to help with the cost of studying. This
grant is means-tested.

##  Farming apprenticeships

###  **What are apprenticeships?**

An apprenticeship is how people are trained in a craft trade or profession.

An apprenticeship programme provides on-the-job training with an employer
along with off-the-job training in an education centre. An apprenticeship can
last 2 to 4 years.

When you complete an apprenticeship programme, you will get a recognised
qualification at Level 5 or above on the NFQ framework.

###  **Apprenticeships in farming**

There are apprenticeships for specific areas of farming.

Teagasc offers 4 different apprenticeship programmes:

  * [ Farm manager ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/apprenticeships/farm-manager/)
  * [ Farm technician ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/apprenticeships/farm-technician/)
  * [ Horticulturist ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/apprenticeships/horticulturist/)
  * [ Sportsturf Management ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/apprenticeships/sportsturf-management/)

See [ our page on apprenticeships for more information
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/apprenticeships/) about other apprenticeship options.

##  Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant Scheme

If you want to study farming, there are different financial supports you can
get to help with the cost.

If you are applying for a full Teagasc level 5 or level 6 course, you may be
able to apply for the Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant Scheme. Otherwise, you
can apply for the standard [ Student Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) .

The Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant Scheme is a grant for students enrolled
in full-time Teagasc level 5 or level 6 courses. The grant is to help with
student’s living costs. It does not cover course fees. The grant is paid for
and managed by Teagasc.

###  **Do I qualify?**

To qualify for the Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant Scheme, you must meet
most of the criteria for the [ Student Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) .

You must meet the Student Grant Scheme conditions about your:

  * Nationality and immigration status 
  * Residency status 
  * Progression in your studies 

In addition, to qualify for the Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant Scheme you
must:

  * Be enrolled on a full-time Teagasc level 5 or level 6 course 
  * Pass the means test (where income is calculated in a slightly different way to the standard Student Grant Scheme means test) 

###  **Means test for Teagasc maintenance grant**

The means test for the Teagasc maintenance grant has the same income limits as
the [ one for the Student Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) .
However, the way your reckonable income is calculated is slightly different.
So, you cannot apply to Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) to be means
tested for a Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant.

Similarly to SUSI, Teagasc looks at all your ’reckonable income’ when
assessing your Teagasc student grant application. Reckonable income is gross
income from all sources. Some social welfare payments and financial support
payments are excluded - see [ more details on reckonable income on the SUSI
website ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/index.html) .

###  **Calculation of farm income**

The Student Grant Scheme looks at all income for the previous tax year when
applying the means test for their grant. However, Teagasc will average farm
income or income from self-employment over the last 3 years when looking at
income for the means test for their grant. This average is based on the
Revenue Notice of Assessment.

Other income will be calculated using your households most recent [ Employment
Detail Summary ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/employment-detail-summary/) and
Statement of Liability.

###  **Income add-backs**

There are a number of deductions that are allowed by Revenue, which are not
allowed for the Student Grant Scheme means test. For example, depreciation.
These deductions are added back to your reckonable income when assessing you
for the grant, which increases your income for the means test. These are known
as ‘add-backs’.

The Teagasc grant does not include some of the Student Grant Scheme ‘add-
backs’ in its means test. So, deductions for the following items are not added
to your reckonable income for the Teagasc grant:

  * Payments to family labour 
  * Finance lease payments 
  * Interest on capital expenditure 
  * Depreciation 

**The household income limits for the Teagasc Maintenance Grant are the same
as the** [ **Student Grant Scheme limits**
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) **.**

###  **How much will I get?**

The amount you get is also based on where you live. Depending on how close you
live to the college, you may receive adjacent rates or non-adjacent rates.
These are based on your Eircode.

**Adjacent rates**

If you normally live less than 30 kilometres from the college you are
attending, you will receive adjacent rates.

**Non-adjacent rates**

If you normally live more than 30 kilometres from the college you are
attending, you will receive non-adjacent rates.

**The grant rates for the Teagasc Maintenance Grant are the same as the** [
**Student Grant Scheme rates**
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#4c1dac) **.**

###  **How will I be paid the grant?**

Maintenance grant payments are paid by Teagasc through the college you are
attending. The payments will be made at 3 stages over the college year and are
calculated on daily attendance, including both online and face-to-face
classes.

###  How do I apply?

To apply, you must submit a completed [ application form (pdf)
](https://www.teagasc.ie/media/website/education/going-to-
college/2024-Student-Maintenance-Grant-Application-Form.pdf) to the following
address:

Teagasc Maintenance Grant,

PO Box 46,

Clonakility,

Co. Cork

P85 FV48

You can find guidance notes on the application process [ on the Teagasc
website ](https://www.teagasc.ie/education/going-to-college/student-
maintenance-grants/application-process/) .

###  **When is the deadline?**

The closing date for applications is 30 September 2024.

###  **What if I have received a Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant before?**

If you have completed a Level 5 course in the 2023/2024 college year and you
want to do a Level 6 course in 2024/2025, you must complete the Teagasc
Student Maintenance Grant Renewal/Reassessment Form 2024/2025.

These forms will be sent out in early September to students who received a
student maintenance grant in 2023/2024 and are progressing to a Level 6
course.

Up to 20% of students who qualified for a student maintenance grant in
2023/2024 will be reassessed for the 2024/2025.

###  **More information on Teagasc Student Maintenance Grants**

For more information on Teagasc Student Maintenance Grants, you can contact
by:

  * Email: [ teagascmaintenancegrant@southwestern.ie ](mailto:teagascmaintenancegrant@southwestern.ie)
  * Phone: 0818 161 000 

##  Student Grant Scheme

The [ Student Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-
supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) is the main
financial support scheme for students studying in Ireland and abroad. It is
also known as the SUSI grant.

Student grants are divided into:

  * Maintenance grants 
  * Fee grants 

Maintenance grants help students with their living costs. Fee grants pay
tuition fees for students who do not qualify for the [ Free Fees Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/) .

Fee grants can also pay the Student Contribution and the cost of essential
field trips.

To qualify for the grant, you must meet certain conditions.

For more information, see our page on the [ Student Grant Scheme
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/student-grant-scheme/) .

##  More information on farm education and training

You should talk to your school guidance counsellor if you are considering a
farming course. You can also contact Teagasc or the universities directly to
find out more about the options for studying farming and farming
apprenticeships.

You can contact [ Teagasc ](https://www.teagasc.ie/) for more information on
the Teagasc Student Maintenance Grant.

If you have any questions or need help applying for the Student Grant Scheme,
contact the SUSI Support desk Monday to Friday, from 9.00am – 5.30pm
(excluding public holidays):

  * **Email:** support@susi.ie 
  * **Phone:** 0818 888 777 if calling from within Ireland, or (+353)1 524 2257 if calling from abroad. 
  * **Post:** Send all documents and correspondence to P.O. Box 869, Little Island, Cork. 

You can find more information on grants and funds available for students on [
the Higher Education Authority website ](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-
performance/funding/student-finance/) .

_**Page edited:** 21 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
education-grants-and-supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Farming%20education%2C%20grants%20and%20supports&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
education-grants-and-supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
education-grants-and-supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Farming%20education%2C%20grants%20and%20supports&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
education-grants-and-supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Farming grants and schemes_ ](/en/environment/land/farming-grants-and-schemes/)

An overview of the main grants and schemes available to farmers.

2602.063

  * [ _Organic Farming Scheme_ ](/en/environment/land/organic-farming-scheme/)

The Organic Farming Scheme (OFS) provides financial support to farmers to
encourage them to produce organic food. It also aims to reduce the
environmental impact of farming and improve animal welfare.

1561.2994

  * [ _Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

1521.0603

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

