**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ About ](/en/about/) > CIS complaints
policy

#  CIS complaints policy

  * Introduction 
  * Informal Resolution 
  * Formal Complaint 

##  Introduction

The Citizens Information Service works hard to make sure that the service we
provide is up to date, relevant and of the highest standard. However, there
may be times when you are unhappy with the service. The Citizens Information
Service is committed to dealing effectively with any complaints you may have
about our service. We also aim to learn from our mistakes and use the
information we gain to improve our services.

While your complaint will be dealt with in confidence, be aware that it will
be discussed with those staff necessary to investigate the complaint. If you
wish to see a specific outcome to your complaint, please tell us what this is.
We cannot guarantee that this outcome will be achieved but it does help us to
understand what the expectation is.

We will make sure that your interactions with us in the future do not suffer
just because you have made a complaint.

If you wish to make a complaint this is how you do it.

##  Informal Resolution

If you are dissatisfied or wish to complain, raise it with the person you are
dealing with. If possible, they will try to resolve it there and then.
However, they may need time to look into it. If this is the case they will
respond to your complaint with an outcome within 5 working days. If they canâ€™t
help they will explain why and, if you wish, you can follow the formal
complaints process below.

##  Formal Complaint

You can make the formal complaint in person, by phone, in writing or by
completing a Customer Complaint form available at reception. Remember to
include key information when making your formal complaint such as name,
address, telephone number, email address (if you have one), details of
complaint including date/time service used.

Formal complaints must be made within 14 days of using the service. You will
receive an acknowledgement of your complaint within five working days and a
response with an outcome to your complaint within 20 working days of receiving
the complaint.

If you are not satisfied with the response to your complaint, you can ask for
it to be reviewed within 5 working days. You can also go on to submit an
appeal within 5 working days of receiving the outcome of the review.

_Please note that any personal data pertaining to you will be processed in
line with the_ [ _Data Protection Notice for Citizens Information Services_
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/downloads/data_protection/CIS_Data_Protection_Notice_v14apr2020.pdf)
_which can be seen by scanning the QR code:_

_**Page edited:** 10 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=CIS%20complaints%20policy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=CIS%20complaints%20policy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Youth Information Centres and Services_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/)

Youth Information Centres and Services provide free, confidential information
for young people and for people who work with young people.

1149.2402

  * [ _Noise pollution and noise complaints_ ](/en/environment/pollution/noise-regulations/)

The rules as regards the control of noise, the various bodies responsible and
how to complain about excessive noise

988.5317

  * [ _Health services when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/accessing-healthcare-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

Find out how to access the Irish healthcare system as a returning Irish
emigrant.

979.65424

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

