**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ About ](/en/about/) > Accessibility
Statement

#  Accessibility Statement

  * Introduction 
  * Measures to support accessibility 
  * Compliance status 
  * How to report accessibility issues 
  * Contact 

##  Introduction

The Citizens Information Board recognises the importance of ensuring that the
citizensinformation.ie website is accessible to everyone.

The Citizens Information Board is committed to making citizensinformation.ie
accessible, in accordance with [ European Union (Accessibility of Websites and
Mobile Applications of Public Sector Bodies) Regulations 2020
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/si/358/made/en/print) and to making
our content available to the widest possible audience, including those who use
assistive technologies.

##  Measures to support accessibility

CIB takes the following measures to ensure accessibility of
citizensinformation.ie:

  * Include accessibility in our internal policies 
  * Publish HTML webpages as standard, reducing the use of printed materials and PDFs as much as possible. If PDFs do need to be used, we will ensure that theyhave a high standard of accessibility. 
  * We have recently engaged with an external accessibility partner, and carried out a full independent accessibility audit of citizensinformation.ie. This is to assess our conformance with the [ Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1 level AA ](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/) . We are reviewing and implementing the findings of the audit. We have a continual Service Improvement plan in place with our accessibility partner, and have a roadmap in place to ensure all our other websites are audited, to achieve a high standard of accessibility. 

##  Compliance status

Citizensinformation.ie is partially conformant with WCAG 2.1 level AA.
Partially conformant means that some parts of the content do not fully conform
to the accessibility standard. The items listed below are noted, and we have a
plan in place to ensure these comply very soon:

  * The cookie banner and pop up modal window that allow you to accept or reject cookies on our website are not fully accessible. We are working to ensure that they are accessible. 
  * Some tables on our website are not fully accessible. We are working to fix these and ensure they are accessible to people using screen readers. 
  * Interactive Controls pose challenges for screen reader users. We have plans to improve this. 
  * The maps within our Centres pages are inaccessible to keyboard users. 
  * Our custom keyboard focus outline does not meet colour contrast requirements so can be difficult to see for users with low vision. 
  * Our main navigation on some pages can pose challenges for users of assistive technology. 
  * Some of our pages’ heading structure is not correctly conveyed to users of assistive technology. 
  * Our ‘skip to main content’ links are inaccessible to keyboard users. 

If any of our content is not easily accessible, please contact us directly
(see the details below).

##  How to report accessibility issues

We’re always looking to improve the accessibility of this website. If you find
any problems not listed on this page or think we’re not meeting accessibility
requirements, please contact us. You can email [ ciofeedback@ciboard.ie
](mailto:ciofeedback@ciboard.ie) or call [ 0818 07 9000 ](tel:0818 07 9000) .

##  Contact

**Digital Content Team**

Ground Floor

George's Quay House

43 Townsend St

Dublin 2 D02 VK65

Telephone: 0818 07 9000

We will revise this Accessibility Statement, once improvements have been made.

_**Page edited:** 12 November 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/accessibility/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Accessibility%20Statement&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/accessibility/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/accessibility/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Accessibility%20Statement&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/accessibility/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Guide to accessibility tools_ ](/en/about/guide-to-accessibility-tools/)

Information about how to navigate citizensinformation.ie using accessibility
tools and features by operating system.

1232.2032

  * [ _UN Convention on the Rights of the Child_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-of-the-child/)

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out the basic human rights
to which every child is entitled. Ireland ratified the Convention on 28
September 1992. Find out more.

819.1478

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

744.5121

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

