**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ About ](/en/about/) > Re-use of Public
Sector Information

#  Re-use of Public Sector Information

Note that the Citizens Information Board will be reviewing the content of this
page to implement changes required under the [ European Union (Open Data and
Re-use of Public Sector Information) Regulations 2021.
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2021/si/376/made/en/html)

The Citizens Information Board complies with the regulations on the Re-use of
Public Sector Information (European Communities (Re-use of Public Sector
Information) Regulations 2005 (as amended)) and we encourage the re-use of the
information that we produce. The regulations are available at [ www.psi.gov.ie
](http://www.psi.gov.ie/) .

Information and documents obtained from [ www.citizensinformation.ie ](/en/)
may be reproduced and/or re-used free of charge subject to the latest PSI
licence, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
Information on the licence is available at [ www.psi.gov.ie
](http://www.psi.gov.ie/) .

Under the CC-BY licence, the source of the information must be acknowledged.
Where a specific attribution statement is not provided the following
attribution statement can be used: “Contains Irish Public Sector Data licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence”.

Please also read the [ disclaimer ](/en/about/disclaimer/) regarding
information available on this website.

For enquiries on the re-use of information maintained by the Citizens
Information Board please email psi@ciboard.ie.

Permission to reproduce information from citizensinformation.ie does not
extend to any material on this site which may be the property of a third
party. Authorisation to reproduce such material must be obtained from the
copyright holders concerned.

_**Page edited:** 4 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/reuse-
psi/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Re-
use%20of%20Public%20Sector%20Information&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/reuse-
psi/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/reuse-
psi/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Re-
use%20of%20Public%20Sector%20Information&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/reuse-
psi/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to renew your driving licence_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/renewing-a-full-driving-licence/)

When your driving licence expires you must renew it if you still want to
drive.

1181.5067

  * [ _VAT refunds on aids and appliances used by people with disabilities_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-disabilities/)

People with disabilities may claim refunds of Value-Added Tax (VAT) on certain
aids and appliances.

1170.8923

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

1155.0095

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

