**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ About ](/en/about/) > Volunteer with
Citizens Information

#  Volunteer with Citizens Information

  * Volunteer with Citizens Information 
  * What is the Citizens Information Service? 
  * If I volunteer with Citizens Information, what will I do? 
  * Benefits of volunteering 
  * What are CIS looking for from volunteers? 
  * How do I apply to be a volunteer? 

##  Volunteer with Citizens Information

Join the team of volunteers who support staff within the Citizens Information
Service to provide information, advice and advocacy to the public. Citizens
Information Services help thousands of people on a range of topics including
social welfare, employment rights, housing and immigration.

If you enjoy meeting people, would like to work as part of a team, and believe
that you can explain services and entitlements to the public in simple
language, then volunteering in your local CIS might be the right fit for you!

Watch this video to find out more about the experience of volunteering in the
Citizens Information Service.

##  What is the Citizens Information Service?

Citizens Information Services (CISs) provide face-to-face services to the
public. Through trained staff and volunteers, CISs provide free, impartial and
confidential information, advice and advocacy services to the public.

Each Citizens Information Service covers a geographical area and delivers the
service through a network of Citizen Information Centres (CICs). There are
eight individual regional Citizens Information Services which are companies
limited by guarantee and are registered charities.

They cover the following areas: North Dublin, Dublin South, North Connacht and
Ulster, North Leinster, North Munster, South Connacht, South Leinster and
South Munster facilitating both rural and urban areas.

CISs provide information on various topics, including;

  * Employment rights 
  * Income support 
  * Social welfare 
  * Family matters 
  * Health services 
  * Housing 
  * Education 
  * Immigration 

Data on the type of information and advice looked for, the range of queries
and concerns raised by the public, and the top information categories and
trends arising each year can be found on the Citizens Information Board's [
DataHub ](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/en/data-hub/) .

If you think you would like to join CIS as a volunteer, please:

  * Read this page and watch the information videos 
  * Think about the responsibilities involved 
  * Find out [ what services are recruiting ](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/en/news/vacancies.html)

##  If I volunteer with Citizens Information, what will I do?

Citizens Information have a fantastic range of rewarding volunteer roles,
which can vary between local Citizens Information Centres. The main areas you
can expect to volunteer in are:

  * Providing information, advice and client support 
  * Administrative support 
  * Reception and customer service 

You will be asked to commit to either a full day or two half days per week.
Each CIS decides the minimum hours per week required. You will:

  * Work as part of a team with staff and other volunteers 
  * Address a wide range of inquiries from the public 
  * Participate in ongoing training in the main areas of services and entitlements 
  * Develop the expertise to find the right answers and share that information 
  * Take part in regular quality reviews, where the manager sits in with you while you deliver information to the public 
  * Use online systems and databases, so a certain level of computer literacy may be required 

###  Volunteer Board Director

Each Citizens Information Service is managed by a Board of Directors, who are
also volunteers. The overall function of the board is to provide oversight of
the delivery of the Citizens Information Service in accordance with a Service
Level Agreement (SLA) with the funder, the Citizens Information Board (CIB).

High standards of corporate governance in CIS voluntary boards are critical to
ensuring a positive contribution to the delivery of information, advice and
advocacy services.

Watch this video to find out more about the experience of volunteering as a
board member in the Citizens Information Service.

##  Benefits of volunteering

In return for your time and dedication, you will:

  * Contribute actively and give back to your community 
  * Use your skills and knowledge 
  * Learn new skills and knowledge 
  * Engage in an activity that you will really enjoy 
  * Meet new people 
  * Gain valuable training and experience 
  * Become an active citizen 
  * Make a positive difference 

##  What are CIS looking for from volunteers?

  * Enthusiastic 
  * Eager to learn 
  * Great with people 
  * Motivated 
  * Committed 
  * Flexible 
  * Available 
  * Team players 

CIS ask for a minimum of one year of service, which includes a probationary
period.

##  How do I apply to be a volunteer?

Firstly, check what services are [ currently recruiting volunteers
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/en/news/vacancies.html) .

Then simply complete the application form and submit it as outlined in the
volunteer advertisement.

If you need further details before making up your mind, you can contact the
centre that is recruiting.

The CIS may shortlist candidates for interviews based on the information
contained in your application form. Applicants will be interviewed to assess
their suitability for this type of work. All applicants will be notified of
the outcome of their application.

CIS has a non-discriminatory recruitment policy. Applicants will not be
discriminated against on the basis of gender, marital status, family status,
sexual orientation, religion, age, disability, race, or membership in the
Traveller community.

_**Page edited:** 8 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/volunteer-
with-citizens-information/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Volunteer%20with%20Citizens%20Information&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/volunteer-
with-citizens-information/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/volunteer-
with-citizens-information/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Volunteer%20with%20Citizens%20Information&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/volunteer-
with-citizens-information/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _About Citizens Information_ ](/en/about/citizens-information-about/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland.

1498.2996

  * [ _Send feedback about citizensinformation.ie_ ](/en/about/feedback/)

Send us feedback about citizensinformation.ie. We do not provide information
or advice via email at present.

807.8236

  * [ _Problems with a service_ ](/en/consumer/buying-services/problem-with-a-service/)

Find out about your rights if you have a problem with a service.

782.8319

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

