**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ About ](/en/about/) > Disclaimer

#  Disclaimer

  * Introduction 
  * General Information Only 
  * Simple Descriptions 
  * Your Particular Circumstances 
  * No Legal or Other Professional Advice Given 
  * Information Only 
  * References to External Information / Organisations 
  * General Disclaimer, Representations, Warranties and Terms 
  * Basis of Use 
  * Translations 
  * Headings and Sub-Headings 

##  Introduction

By means of this website, the Citizens Information Board provides information
concerning public and social services.

Every reasonable effort has been made to ensure that the information provided
by this website is reasonably comprehensive, accurate and clear.

However, the information provided on or via this website may not necessarily
be completely comprehensive or accurate, and, for this reason, it is provided
on an "AS IS" and "AS AVAILABLE" basis.

If you think you may have noticed any error or omission, please let us know by
contacting [ ciofeedback@ciboard.ie ](mailto:ciofeedback@ciboard.ie) . It is
our policy to correct errors or omissions as soon as any error or omission has
been established to our satisfaction.

##  General Information Only

While the Citizens Information Board makes every reasonable effort to provide
information that is as comprehensive, accurate and clear as possible, the
information provided on this site is necessarily of a general nature and may
not address the specific circumstances of a particular individual.

##  Simple Descriptions

Responses to queries, and the contents of, and documents on, or available
from, this site describe schemes and services as simply as possible. These
schemes and services may involve technically complex issues (for example,
legal issues). The information provided or the simple descriptions available
on, or via, this site may not address all such issues, or address them in
sufficient detail for your particular needs.

##  Your Particular Circumstances

If you wish to find out what your particular position is in your own
particular circumstances, or if have an enquiry about any particular
entitlements or services that may be available to you, you may need to seek
appropriate professional, or other, advice and/or contact the particular
agency or agencies responsible.

##  No Legal or Other Professional Advice Given

In particular, the information provided on this site is not legal advice or
professional advice of any other kind, and should not be considered to be
such, or relied or acted upon in that regard. If you need legal or other
professional advice, you should consult a suitably qualified person.

##  Information Only

The Citizens Information Board provides information on, and on the
availability of, schemes and services. It is not responsible for the schemes
or services, nor for the way in which such schemes or services may be operated
and administered in practice.

##  References to External Information / Organisations

The website sometimes refers or links to external organisations or sites over
which the Citizens Information Board has no control and accepts no
responsibility. Any references or links on the website to external
organisations or websites are provided as a matter of convenience only. They
should not be taken as an endorsement of the contents of those external
websites or of those organisations.

This website may contain third party owned content (e.g. articles, image
libraries, data feeds or abstracts) and may also include hypertext links to
third party owned websites. We provide such third party content and links as a
courtesy to our users. Links are provided for your information only. We have
no control over any third party owned websites or content referred to,
accessed by or available on this website. To the extent permitted by law,
therefore, we do not endorse, sponsor, recommend or otherwise accept any
responsibility for such third party websites or content, or for the
availability of such websites. In particular, we do not accept any liability
arising out of any allegation that any third party owned content (whether
published on this, or any other, website) infringes the intellectual property
rights of any person, or any liability arising out of any information or
opinion contained on such third party website or content.

##  General Disclaimer, Representations, Warranties and Terms

To the extent permitted by law, the Citizens Information Board and the State,
and their respective servants or agents, assume and accept no responsibility
for, and give no guarantees, undertakings or warranties concerning, the
accuracy, clarity, comprehensiveness, completeness, timeliness, fitness-for-
purpose, up-to-date nature, reliability, or otherwise, of the information
provided on this website, and do not accept any liability whatsoever in
respect of, or arising from, any errors or omissions or any reliance on, or
use of, such information.

Whilst we have taken reasonable care in compiling this website, to the extent
permitted by law, we accept no responsibility for any loss or damage claimed
to arise from any reliance on, or action taken by any person or organisation,
wherever they are based, as a result, direct or otherwise, of, information
contained in, or accessed through, this website, whether such information is
provided by us or by a third party.

##  Basis of Use

By using this website, you agree that the use of information obtained or
downloaded from or through this website is at your sole discretion and risk.

##  Translations

The Citizens Information Board accepts no responsibility for the accuracy of
the translations provided on this website.

##  Headings and Sub-Headings

The headings and sub-headings used in this disclaimer are for general ease of
reading and navigation only, and do not affect the content or interpretation
of the text in any way.

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2013 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/disclaimer/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Disclaimer&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/disclaimer/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/disclaimer/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Disclaimer&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/about/disclaimer/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

716.51166

  * [ _Time limits for the start of criminal proceedings_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/)

Information on the time limits for the commencement of criminal proceedings in
Ireland is provided.

674.6965

  * [ _Assessing the means of a couple for social assistance payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-couple/)

Describes how the means of a couple are assessed for social assistance (means-
tested payments).

664.42255

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

