**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Before your baby is born ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/) > Home birth

#  Home birth

  * Introduction 
  * COVID-19 and pregnancy 
  * Pregnancy and the COVID-19 vaccine 
  * How the National Home Birth Service works 
  * Private home birth arrangements 
  * Cost 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

If you have a low-risk pregnancy, you may choose to have a home birth. The
Health Service Executive (HSE) has a [ National Home Birth Service
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/maternity/homebirth_services.html) for
eligible expectant mothers who wish to have a home birth under the care of a
Self-Employed Community Midwife (SECM).

In some HSE areas, the service may be available through a maternity hospital
or a HSE scheme. However, in other HSE areas, only private SECMs are available
to attend a home birth – see ‘How to apply’ below.

Since June 2022, a temporary suspension of the HSE home birth service in the
Midwest is in place pending the outcome of an external review of the service.

##  COVID-19 and pregnancy

If you are pregnant and think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, contact
your GP. Most women who test positive and have mild symptoms can safely self-
isolate at home (7 days). Routine antenatal or ultrasound appointments should
be postponed until after the period of self-isolation.

Pregnant women who have COVID-19 should only attend the hospital if in need of
urgent medical or obstetric care. It is important to phone the hospital before
going to make sure you are seen at the right place by the right medical team.

If you are booked to have a home birth and you are worried about COVID-19,
contact your self-employed community midwife or the maternity hospital where
you are booked for antenatal care.

Check with your local hospital about [ antenatal classes ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/antenatal-classes/) as many have moved
online.

##  Pregnancy and the COVID-19 vaccine

If you have not had any COVID-19 vaccines, you can get your first round of
COVID-19 vaccination or first booster at any stage of your pregnancy.

If you had a booster dose during your current pregnancy, then a second booster
dose is not needed.

If you had a booster dose before this pregnancy, you can get your second
booster at or after 16 weeks of your pregnancy.

Find more information on getting the [ COVID-19 vaccine during pregnancy
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/people-at-higher-risk/covid19-and-
pregnancy/) , and [ getting the vaccine while trying for a baby or
breastfeeding ](https://www2.hse.ie/screening-and-
vaccinations/covid-19-vaccine/get-the-vaccine/breastfeeding/) on the HSE
website.

If you are unsure about whether to get a vaccination before, during or after
pregnancy, you can [ read the HSE’s information booklet (pdf)
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/hcpinfo/guidelines/covid19.pdf) .

##  How the National Home Birth Service works

If you want to find out more about the [ National Home Birth Service
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/maternity/homebirth-services.html) ,
you need to contact your [ Local Health Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/lho/) . You will be put through to
the designated official who is a qualified midwife. You will be sent an
information pack.

You will need to contact a Self-Employed Community Midwife (SECM). An SECM has
an agreement with the HSE to deliver the home birth service according to
certain terms and conditions. You and the midwife should fill out an
application form for the service. Your midwife will send the form to the HSE
Designated Midwifery Officer (DMO) who will assess your eligibility for the
service.

If your application is accepted, this entitles you to free care during your
pregnancy, during labour and birth, and for up to 14 days after your baby is
born. The HSE will provide you with a Home Birth Pack with all the information
you will need for a home delivery. You can find more detailed information
about the process in [ Appendix 4 Pathway of Care
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/maternity/homebirth_services.html#Appendix
4) on hse.ie.

Your eligibility for a home birth is continually assessed right up until your
baby is born. If, at any stage, you are assessed as not eligible to have your
baby at home, your midwife and the DMO can help you to find a suitable
maternity unit or hospital.

##  Private home birth arrangements

Alternatively, you can engage a SECM privately and your antenatal, delivery
and postnatal care will be provided by them. If you enter into a private
arrangement with a private midwife or an SECM for a home birth that has not
been approved by the HSE Designated Midwifery Officer, it is the
responsibility of your midwife to have appropriate insurance cover and you
should be sure that such cover is in place.

##  Cost

If you are using maternity services provided by a hospital or HSE scheme, they
are provided free of charge.

Many private health insurers provide a grant towards the cost of a home birth.

##  How to apply

If you wish to have a home birth, you need to decide this as early as possible
in your pregnancy.

Contact a HSE Designated Midwifery Officer or a Self-Employed Community
Midwife (SECM) in the [ National Home Birth Service
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/maternity/homebirth-services.html) to
discuss your eligibility and find out more. Since June 2022, a temporary
suspension of the home birth service in the Midwest is in place pending the
outcome of an external review of the service.

_**Page edited:** 25 August 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/home-
birth/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Home%20birth&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/home-
birth/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/home-
birth/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Home%20birth&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/home-
birth/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tracing your birth information and birth family_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/tracing-your-birth-family/)

Find out how to access your birth information or trace your birth family if
you were adopted in Ireland.

1075.7399

  * [ _Getting a birth, marriage or death certificate in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-certificate/)

This page describes how to get a birth, adoption, marriage, civil partnership
or death certificate in Ireland.

1051.6547

  * [ _Benefits and entitlements relating to birth and children_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/benefits-and-entitlements-relating-to-birth/)

There is a range of benefits and entitlements to support women who are having
a baby. This document gives a general overview of these supports.

874.63184

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

