**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Getting married ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/) > Getting married

#  Getting married

  * Introduction 
  * Requirements for marriage 
  * Notification requirements for marriage 
  * Different ways of getting married 
  * Getting married abroad 
  * Changes to your legal status following marriage 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Getting married is one of the most significant events in someone's life.
However, there are rules and procedures you must follow in order to marry in
Ireland. There are also rules and procedures if you are ordinarily resident in
Ireland and choose to [ marry abroad ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
married/getting-married-abroad/) .

Aside from the rules about how and where you can marry, [ marriage will
immediately affect lots of areas of your life ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/married-couples/how-marriage-changes-your-legal-status/) . Your
legal status, your inheritance rights, and pensions are just some things that
being married will change.

##  Requirements for marriage

Couples of the same sex or opposite sex can marry in Ireland. The minimum age
for getting married in Ireland is 18 years of age. If you are ordinarily
resident in Ireland and you [ wish to get married abroad ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/getting-married-abroad/) , you must be aged at
least 18. In addition, you must have the capacity to marry. That is, you must
freely consent to the marriage and have the capacity to understand what
marriage means. Read more about the [ legal requirements for marriage in
Ireland ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/legal-requirements-
for-marriage/) .

##  Notification requirements for marriage

If you are getting married in Ireland (whether you are an Irish citizen or a
foreign national), you must notify the registrar in the [ Civil Registration
Office ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-
civil-registration-service.html) of your intention to marry at least 3 months
before your wedding day. You should book your appointment to give notice as
far in advance as possible as appointments fill up quickly.

Both of you must attend the marriage notification appointment.

When you meet the registrar, you will sign a declaration stating that you do
not know of [ any legal reason why the marriage cannot happen
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a4a0c2-impediments-to-marriage-in-
ireland/) . If everything is in order, the registrar gives you a marriage
registration form (MRF). The MRF gives you authorisation or permission to get
married. You give it to the person who will be solemnising (the person who is
authorised to perform) your marriage.

Find out [ how to notify the Registrar ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/notification-requirements-for-marriage/) that
you will be getting married in Ireland.

The requirement to give 3-months' notice does not apply to civil partners
whose civil partnership was registered in Ireland. If civil partners choose to
marry, their civil partnership is automatically dissolved. Contact your local
[ Civil Registration Office ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-
marriages/contact-a-civil-registration-service.html) to check what
documentation you need to provide.

###  Postponing your wedding

If you have already started your 3-month notice period but have had to
postpone your wedding, your MRF is valid for 6 months starting from your
original wedding date.

If your **rescheduled wedding date is within this 6-month period** , your MRF
can be amended. To do this, you should contact the local civil registration
service where you originally served notice of your intention to marry.

If your **rescheduled wedding date is** **after this 6-month period** , you
will need to contact the office where you originally served notice and give
them your new date of marriage. You must do this at least 3 months before your
new marriage date. You will need to meet with the Registrar again to get a new
MRF. There is no charge for this.

##  Different ways of getting married

There are different [ legal ways of getting married in Ireland ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)
. These include [ civil marriage ceremonies ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/civil-marriage-ceremony/) and [ religious and
secular marriage ceremonies ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
married/religious-and-secular-marriage-ceremonies/) . The requirements of
different faiths and secular bodies may differ, so check in advance with the
relevant member of the clergy or body for further information.

Since November 2007, no matter how you marry (that is, through a civil,
secular or religious ceremony), the registration process is the same. You are
issued with a Marriage Registration Form (MRF) by the registrar, following
notification, which gives you authorisation to get married. You give it to the
person who will be solemnising (performing) your marriage. Following the
marriage ceremony, the completed MRF should be given to a registrar within one
month of the marriage ceremony, for [ the marriage to be registered
](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/registration-of-marriage/) .
Some [ civil registration services ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-
deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-registration-service.html) have a walk-in
service. You need to phone and book an appointment for others. You cannot get
your marriage certificate until the marriage is registered.

##  Getting married abroad

If you are an Irish citizen and are planning to marry abroad, the legal
validity of your marriage is governed, in part, by the laws of the country in
which you marry. The legal formalities abroad can be very different to those
in Ireland. You can read information for [ Irish citizens planning to marry
abroad ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/getting-married-
abroad/) .

##  Changes to your legal status following marriage

Getting married affects many areas of your life in Ireland. These range from
life insurance and pensions, to inheritance, [ presumption of paternity
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/presumption-of-
paternity/) and even [ taxation ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-
of-married-people/) . Find out [ how marriage affects your legal status
](/en/birth-family-relationships/married-couples/how-marriage-changes-your-
legal-status/) .  

##  Further information

You can read more about marriage in the following pages:

  * [ Legal requirements for marriage ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/legal-requirements-for-marriage/)
  * [ Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)
  * [ Notification requirements for marriage ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/notification-requirements-for-marriage/)
  * [ Registration of marriage ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/registration-of-marriage/)
  * [ Religious and secular marriage ceremonies ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-marriage-ceremonies/)
  * [ Civil marriage ceremonies ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/civil-marriage-ceremony/)
  * [ Getting married abroad ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/getting-married-abroad/)
  * [ Pre-nuptial agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/pre-nuptial-agreements/)
  * [ Broken engagements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/broken-engagments/)

You can also visit the HSE's website for further information on [ how to get
married in Ireland ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-
marriages/how-to-get-married-in-ireland/how-to-get-married-in-ireland.html) .

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/getting-
married/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Getting%20married&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/getting-
married/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/getting-
married/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Getting%20married&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/getting-
married/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Getting married abroad_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/getting-married-abroad/)

Information for Irish citizens planning to get married abroad.

2416.2295

  * [ _Taxation of married people and civil partners_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/)

There are three ways in which you can be taxed as a married person. Find out
about the different options.

1348.4525

  * [ _Getting a divorce in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/)

A divorce decree allows both parties to a marriage to remarry. However,
special conditions must be met before a court can grant a divorce.

1323.1482

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

