**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Separation, divorce and dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/) > Family and shared homes

#  Family and shared homes

  * Introduction 
  * Protection of the family or shared home 
  * Getting advice 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The law in Ireland distinguishes between a _family home_ and a _shared home._

###  Family home (married couples)

A _family home_ primarily means a home in which a married couple ordinarily
lives. Some family homes are held in the sole name of just one spouse.
However, many family homes are held in the names of both spouses as a [ joint
tenancy ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-
cohabiting-couples/) as this is often a condition of the mortgage used to buy
the house.

###  Shared home (civil partners)

According to the [ Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of
Cohabitants Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) , a _shared
home_ is a home where civil partners ordinarily live.

###  Your property rights if you are cohabiting

If you are cohabiting (living together but not married or in a civil
partnership) and your relationship breaks down, the property will belong to
the person who holds the legal title to the home. This could be one of you, or
both of you. However, the other person may have a right to redress through the
courts. To find out more, read our page [ Property rights and the breakdown of
a relationship ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-
other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-
relationship/) .

##  Protection of the family or shared home

There are laws to prevent one spouse or civil partner from selling,
mortgaging, leasing or transferring the family or shared home without the
agreement of the other spouse or civil partner. This is particularly important
when the home is held in the name of only one spouse or civil partner.

However, the courts can remove the need for the other person's agreement if it
thinks that the withholding of consent is unreasonable. You can also apply to
the courts for an order to restrain the other spouse or civil partner from
doing anything that might reduce your or their interest in the shared home, or
make it unsuitable to live in.

You can inform the [ Property Registration Authority ](http://www.prai.ie/)
that you are the spouse or civil partner of a property owner. A notice to that
effect will then be registered. There is no charge for such a registration.
There is no requirement to do this and if you don’t, it does not affect your
rights as a spouse or civil partner.

There is no stamp duty or registry fees payable on the transfer of a family
home or shared home from the name of one person in marriage or civil
partnership to a joint tenancy.

###  Property adjustment order

One of the biggest difficulties facing separating couples is what should
happen to their family or shared home. If agreement cannot be reached as to
who will occupy and own the home, the court can make an order in relation to
it.

An order in relation to the family or shared home is usually applied for when
applying for a decree of judicial separation, divorce or dissolution, and it
is referred to as a _property adjustment order_ .

In making a property adjustment order, a court will consider all of the family
circumstances and will take into account the welfare of a dependent spouse or
civil partner and any dependent children. The court order will state the
following:

  * Who has the right to live in the family or shared home and for how long 
  * Who has ownership rights in the family or shared home and what share each partner owns 

###  Who has the right to live in the home and for how long?

In the case of a married couple where there are children, the spouse with whom
the children live will often be given the right to live in the family home
until the youngest child reaches 18 or 23. This can provide a sense of
continuity for children who are experiencing the separation of their parents.
The [ Children and Family Relationships Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/9/enacted/en/html) has amended
the civil partnership legislation to provide similar protection for dependent
children of civil partners.

The court can make an exclusion order in relation to the spouse or civil
partner who is leaving the home. An exclusion order reflects the recognition
of the courts that it is not practical for separated couples to occupy the
same house, or for the partner who leaves to retain a key and have free access
to the house. It does not imply any unacceptable conduct on the part of the
partner who is excluded from the house.

###  Who has ownership rights in the home and what share does each person
have?

A court can order that the house is sold and the proceeds divided equally or
in whatever shares it considers fair. It can order that the sale be delayed
for a specified period of time, for example, while dependent childrent are
young. It can order the transfer of the house into joint names or into the
sole name of one spouse or civil partner. If the house is held under a tenancy
from a local authority, it can order the transfer of the tenancy.

##  Getting advice

Whether you are considering separating or applying for a decree of divorce or
dissolution, it is advisable to get legal advice.

If you choose to hire a private solicitor, there is no fixed rate of charges
for legal fees in Ireland. You should get some quotes before deciding on a
legal firm. [ Contact information for solicitors firms
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/)
throughout Ireland is available on the Law Society website.

To enquire whether you are [ eligible for legal aid or advice
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) from the
Legal Aid Board, contact [ your nearest law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/Publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) . The
law centre staff will assess your means (income) and let you know if you are
eligible. Legal aid is not typically free and everyone must normally pay a
contribution towards costs.

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) ](http://www.flac.ie/)

is an independent, voluntary organisation that operates a network of legal
advice clinics throughout the country. These clinics are confidential, free of
charge and open to all. Contact your [ nearest Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC services in
your area. FLAC also runs an [ information and referral line
](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline/) during office hours for basic legal
information.

##  Further information

###  Law Society of Ireland

Blackhall Place  
Dublin  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6724800

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6724801

**Homepage:** [ http://www.lawsociety.ie ](http://www.lawsociety.ie)

**Email:** [ general@lawsociety.ie ](mailto:general@lawsociety.ie)

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 1 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Family%20and%20shared%20homes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Family%20and%20shared%20homes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Individual home energy upgrade grants (Better Energy Homes)_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-scheme/)

This scheme provides grants to help to increase the energy efficiency of
homes, including grants for home insulation.

1314.0688

  * [ _Free energy upgrades (Warmer Homes Scheme)_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/)

This scheme provides free home energy upgrades to homeowners who get certain
social welfare payments.

1254.1401

  * [ _Tusla - the Child and Family Agency_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/)

Tusla - the Child and Family Agency - is the State agency responsible for
improving the well-being and outcomes for children.

1241.8054

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

