**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/) > Rights of same-sex couples

#  Rights of same-sex couples

  * Introduction 
  * Civil partnerships 
  * Same-sex marriage 
  * Same-sex cohabitants 
  * EU citizens and their family members 

##  Introduction

A statutory civil partnership registration scheme for same-sex couples was
introduced in Ireland in 2011. Following a vote in favour of marriage equality
in a [ constitutional referendum ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-
referenda/voting/electoral-commission/) in November 2015, same sex couples now
have the right to marry.

##  Civil partnerships

Under the [ Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of
Cohabitants Act 2010,
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) a statutory
civil partnership registration scheme for same-sex couples was introduced to
give legal recognition of same-sex couples. Under the scheme, registered civil
partners have broadly the same rights and obligations towards each other as
married couples.

However, following the passing of the referendum in 2015 on legalising same-
sex marriage and the enactment of the Marriage Act 2015, civil partnerships
are no longer granted in Ireland.

Civil partnerships that existed before 2015 are still recognised, and existing
partnerships are automatically dissolved if the couple decide to marry.

Find more information in our page on [ Civil partnership and same-sex couples
](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-partnerships/) .

##  Same-sex marriage

Since 16 November 2015, same-sex couples get can legally get married in
Ireland. They have the same rights and obligations towards each other as
opposite-sex married couples.

Couples in a civil partnership can also marry.

Read more on our page on [ Getting married ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/getting-married/) .

##  Same-sex cohabitants

Cohabitants are 2 adults of the same-sex or opposite-sex, who are:

  * Not married to each other or in a registered civil partnership 
  * Not related within the [ prohibited degrees of relationship ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/legal-prerequisites-for-marriage#l3b8db) (for example, certain people related by blood or marriage cannot get married) 
  * Living together in an intimate and committed relationship 

The [ Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act
2010 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) changed
a number of existing laws, so that the rights available to opposite-sex
couples living together are also available to same-sex couples living
together. For example:

  * The [ Residential Tenancies Act 2004 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2004/en/act/pub/0027/index.html) was amended so that a same-sex cohabitant of a deceased tenant has the right to inherit a tenancy 
  * The [ Civil Liability Act 1961 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1961/en/act/pub/0041/index.html) now gives a same-sex cohabitant of a deceased person the right to sue for damages in the event of the cohabitant’s wrongful death 
  * _Qualified cohabitants_ as defined in the 2010 Act are now entitled to be informed about the registration of an [ enduring power of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/) under the [ Powers of Attorney Act 1996 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1996/en/act/pub/0012/index.html)

###  Redress scheme for cohabitants

The 2010 Act also introduced a [ redress scheme for cohabiting couples
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/) (including same-sex
cohabiting couples), which protects a financially dependent cohabitant in the
event of the relationship ending.

This means the financially-dependent partner can apply to the Court, and the
Court can make orders similar to those available to married couples when they
separate or divorce (for example, a property adjustment order or a
compensatory maintenance order). Or, if one cohabitant dies, the surviving
cohabitant can apply to the Court for provision from the estate of the
deceased cohabitant.

To be a qualified cohabitant for the redress scheme, you must have lived
together for at least 5 years, or for 2 years if you have a child with your
partner. If one of you is still married, then neither of you can be a
qualified cohabitant until the married person has been living apart from their
spouse for at least 4 of the previous 5 years.

###  Paying tax

Cohabiting couples (whether same sex or opposite sex) are **not** treated in
the same way as married couples or civil partners for tax purposes. Revenue [
assesses cohabiting couples as single individuals ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) for tax.

** Social welfare entitlements for cohabitants  **

Cohabiting couples (including same-sex couples) are treated the same as
married couples. This means that, when one cohabitant makes a claim for a
social welfare payment, the other cohabitant is treated as an [ adult
dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-
adult-dependant/) .

##  EU citizens and their family members

The [ European Communities (Free Movement of Persons) Regulations 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/si/548/made/en/print) transpose [ EU
Directive 2004/38/EC
](http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/free_movement_of_persons_asylum_immigration/l33152_en.htm)
into Irish law. The Regulations allow EU citizens and their family members the
right to ‘facilitation of entry’ and residence in Ireland.

The Regulations also widen the definition of ‘family member’, to include:

  * A partner with whom the EU citizen has a ‘valid durable relationship’ 
  * The dependent parents 
  * Children under 21 and other dependent children of that partner 

Read more about [ residence rights for family members ](/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/) .

_**Page edited:** 25 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-same-sex-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rights%20of%20same-
sex%20couples&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-same-sex-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-same-sex-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Rights%20of%20same-
sex%20couples&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-same-sex-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rights of cohabiting couples (couples living together)_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/)

Couples living together have some rights and obligations, but they do not have
the same rights and obligations as married couples or civil partnerships

1854.1548

  * [ _Inheritance rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

Cohabiting couples have no automatic right to inheritance on the death of
either partner. What are your rights, and find out how you can plan and make
provisions for dependants.

1777.9868

  * [ _Property rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

This page explains the property rights of cohabiting couples, for example, in
relation to buying a home together, making a cohabitation agreement, applying
for local authority housing, and getting legal advice.

1650.6255

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

