**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Married couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/married-couples/) > Marital status and inheritance

#  Marital status and inheritance

  * Introduction 
  * Spousal inheritance rights 
  * The impact of separation and divorce on inheritance 
  * Children's inheritance rights 
  * Getting legal advice 

##  Introduction

When your partner dies, your inheritance rights will depend on whether or not
you were married to each other (or in a civil partnership).

This page explains your rights to **spousal inheritance** , as well as the
rules regarding your children’s inheritance.

If you were not married or in a civil partnership, but you were cohabiting
(living together) you will only automatically inherit from your partner if
they left a bequest to you in a valid will. Read more about [ the inheritance
rights of cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-
couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/) .

For information on how civil partnership affects your right to inherit, read [
civil partnership and inheritance ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-
partnerships/civil-partnership-and-inheritance/) .

##  Spousal inheritance rights

If your spouse dies, your share of inheritance will depend on 2 factors, if
you have not already given up your entitlements (see 'Deed of variation'
below):

  1. Whether or not there is a valid will, and 
  2. Whether or not your deceased spouse has any children 

####  You are entitled to your spouse’s whole estate (all of their
possessions) if:

  1. There is no will or the will is invalid, and 
  2. Your deceased spouse has no children or grandchildren 

**You are entitled to two-thirds of their estate (possessions) if:**

  1. There is no will or will is invalid, and 
  2. Your deceased spouse has children or grandchildren 

**You are entitled to half of their estate (possessions) if:**

  1. There is a valid will, and 
  2. Your deceased spouse has no children or grandchildren 

If more than one-half is granted to you in the will, you can insist on what is
set out in the will.

**You are entitled to one-third of their estate (possessions) if:**

  1. There is a valid will, and 
  2. Your deceased spouse has children or grandchildren. 

If more than one-third is granted to you in the will, you can insist on what
is set out in the will.

###  Getting your legal right share

If there is a [ will and an executor ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/dealing-
with-the-deceaseds-estate/) has been appointed, then the executor deals with
the estate. The executor must make sure that you (the spouse/civil partner)
are aware of your right to a legal right share and they must distribute the
estate in accordance with the will and the law. You should not have to go to
court to get this share. Read about [ Making a will in Ireland
](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-will/) .

If your spouse or civil partner left a gift to you in their will, you can
choose to accept the gift instead of your legal right share. Alternatively,
you can insist on your legal right share (and the specific gift as part of
that legal right share, if it is of less value that the legal right share).

Your spouse’s executor must tell you in writing of your right to choose
between these 2 options. You must ask for your legal right share within 6
months of being notified, or within 12 months of the taking out of the Grant
of Representation.

**Deed of variation**

A deed of variation (also known as a deed of family arrangement) is a legal
document that allows beneficiaries to rearrange or vary the entitlements due
to them. For example, the beneficiaries may decide that all or part of their
entitlement should be redistributed to their children (the next generation),
siblings, friends or charity. It is important to get legal and financial
advice before deciding to use a deed of variation as there may be tax
implications for you and the person receiving the benefit.

##  The impact of separation and divorce on inheritance

###  Informal separation

If you and your spouse were living apart, but you did not have a formal [
separation agreement ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/judicial-separation/) or [ divorce ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) , you continue to be
spouses in the eyes of the law. This means that you are still entitled to the
appropriate share of your deceased spouse’s estate (possessions).

###  Legal separation

If you and your spouse have a formal separation agreement, you may have
already renounced or disclaimed (given up) your [ succession rights
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/succession/) .

Similarly, if the court granted you a decree of judicial separation, your
succession rights will be extinguished (ended) if an order stating this is
made by the court.

If you are unsure about your [ succession rights ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/succession/) following separation,
contact your solicitor for advice.

###  Divorce

If you are divorced, you are not normally entitled to any inheritance from
your ex-spouse when they die, unless they have left something to you in a
valid will.

##  Children's inheritance rights

Both marital and non-marital children have equal rights to inherit from their
parents. However, non-marital children may have to [ prove paternity
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/presumption-of-
paternity/) if it is disputed. Children's inheritance rights may be affected
by their deceased parent's marital status.

####  Children (whether minor or adult) are entitled to the entire estate
divided equally between them if:

  1. There is no will or the will is invalid, and 
  2. The deceased parent is not married, or their spouse is already dead 

####  However, children are only entitled to one-third of the estate divided
equally between them if:

  1. There is no valid will or the will is invalid, and 
  2. The deceased parent is married and is survived by their spouse. 

**Children have no absolute right to inherit their parent's estate if the
deceased parent has made a valid will.**

###  If you (the child) have not been adequately provided for

If a child (either minor or adult) believes they have not been adequately
provided for in their parent’s will, they can make an application to the
court. The court will decide if the parent has "failed in his moral duty to
make proper provision for the child in accordance with his means".

Each case is decided on its merits and the court looks at the situation from
the point of view of a "prudent and just" parent. Anyone considering
challenging a will on these grounds should get legal opinion before applying
to the court.

##  Getting legal advice

For further information on your inheritance rights, you should seek legal
advice.

###  Hiring a solicitor

If you choose to hire a private solicitor, be aware that there is no fixed
rate of charges for legal fees.

Get some quotes before deciding which solicitor to use.

You can find [ contact information for solicitors throughout Ireland
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/) on the Law Society website.

###  Legal aid

You can check if you are [ eligible for legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-
advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) by contacting [ your nearest law
centre ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/contact-us/find-a-law-centre/) .
Legal aid is not usually free and almost everyone must pay a contribution
towards costs.

###  Free legal advice

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres)
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.flac.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CMoira.Fraser%40ciboard.ie%7C6003ac21371841ee4d9008dc57cbaf6e%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638481779534958139%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=IRVd8UpJVDK4GtmUExSMn71M80oy0Kxvgk7umNpZ6vc%3D&reserved=0)
is an independent, voluntary organisation. A limited number of [ FLAC phone
clinic appointments ](https://www.flac.ie/help/advice/) are offered in
conjunction with [ Citizen Information Services
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcentres.citizensinformation.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CMoira.Fraser%40ciboard.ie%7C6003ac21371841ee4d9008dc57cbaf6e%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638481779534973218%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=PWAIHWpLyGDAn04tjg40HZExuQuckU6HVSOtHycEwY0%3D&reserved=0)
around the country. These appointments are with a volunteer lawyer and are
confidential and free of charge. Contact your nearest [ Citizens Information
Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC
phone clinic appointments in your area. FLAC’s [ Information and Referral Line
](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline/) for basic legal information is open
Monday to Friday from 9.30am-1pm.

_**Page edited:** 11 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-
inheritance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Marital%20status%20and%20inheritance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-
inheritance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-
inheritance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Marital%20status%20and%20inheritance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-
inheritance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Marital status and social welfare entitlements_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-social-welfare-entitlements/)

Your marital status can affect your eligibility for certain social welfare
payments. Find out more.

1321.4541

  * [ _Civil partnership and inheritance_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-partnership-and-inheritance/)

This page describes your right to inheritance in a civil partnership.

1110.0928

  * [ _Inheritance rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

Cohabiting couples have no automatic right to inheritance on the death of
either partner. What are your rights, and find out how you can plan and make
provisions for dependants.

1070.9216

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

