**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Getting married ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/) > Religious and secular marriage ceremonies

#  Religious and secular marriage ceremonies

  * Introduction 
  * Civil ceremonies 
  * Religious ceremonies 
  * Secular ceremonies 
  * Rules 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

In Ireland, to be legally entitled to marry, both of you must:

  * Have the [ capacity to marry ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/legal-requirements-for-marriage/) each other 
  * Freely consent to the marriage 
  * Observe the [ marriage notification process ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/notification-requirements-for-marriage/) required by law. 

You can get married in a [ civil ceremony, a religious ceremony, or a secular
ceremony ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-
ways-of-getting-married/) and each is equally valid and binding under Irish
law. For a marriage to be legal, the ceremony must be performed by a
solemniser. _Solemniser_ is the term used for people licensed by the State to
conduct weddings.  

##  Civil ceremonies

Civil ceremonies are legally binding secular marriage ceremonies performed by
a civil registrar. The registrar works for the State.

Civil ceremonies can take place in a registry office, or registrars can travel
to perform civil ceremonies in an approved room or venue. In general,
registrars only perform ceremonies in the county in which they are based.
Civil ceremonies can only take place within the office working hours of the
registrar.

There can be no mention of anything religious or spiritual in your ceremony.
If you are planning to get married by civil ceremony, you should contact your
local [ Civil Registration Service ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-
deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-registration-service.html) for advice on
how to proceed. You can find more information in our document [ civil marriage
ceremonies ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/civil-marriage-
ceremony/) .

##  Religious ceremonies

Religious ceremonies are performed by registered religious solemnisers of
established religions. They usually take place in their places of worship, and
the ceremony is performed according to the beliefs and philosophies of that
particular body or church. If you are [ getting married by religious ceremony
](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-
marriage-ceremonies/) , you should contact the authorities of the religious
body for advice on how to proceed.

##  Secular ceremonies

Secular ceremonies are legally recognised in Ireland if they are carried out
by a registered secular solemniser. Secular ceremonies are performed by bodies
that have a viewpoint that does not include anything religious or spiritual.
Humanist ceremonies are the most common type of secular ceremony in Ireland.
If you wish to [ get married by secular ceremony ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-marriage-ceremonies/) ,
you should contact the authorities of the secular body for advice on how to
proceed.

While a marriage ceremony can be performed according to the customs and rites
of the body or church, there are certain requirements that must be met for any
marriage to be legal.

##  Rules

**Marriage Registration Form**

Whether you decide on a religious, secular or civil ceremony you will require
a Marriage Registration Form (MRF). You can get your MRF by giving [ 3 months’
notice of intention to marry ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
married/notification-requirements-for-marriage/) to the registrar at a Civil
Registration Service. You should contact your local [ Civil Registration
Service ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-
civil-registration-service.html) to make an appointment with the registrar.
You can also use the [ online booking system
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/getting-
married/book-appointment/) at [ crsappointments.ie
](http://www.crsappointments.ie/CeremonyPlanner.Ireland/) for some areas of
the country.

If you meet the 3 months’ notification requirements and there is no barrier to
you getting married (known as an _impediment_ to the marriage) the registrar
will issue you with an Marriage Registration Form (MRF) giving you permission
to marry. You should give the MRF to the person who will be solemnising the
marriage in advance of the marriage ceremony.

###  Register of Solemnisers

Anyone solemnising a marriage must be on the [ Register of Solemnisers
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/077ce8-register-of-
solemnisers/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/downloads/RegisterOfSolemnisers)
which is maintained and updated by the [ General Register Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/af7893-general-register-office/) . It lists
civil registrars and the members of the various religious and secular bodies
who have been nominated by the relevant authorities of those bodies as
solemnisers.

Temporary registrations of solemnisers of religious and secular marriages are
possible for people who only wish to solemnise a specific marriage or to
solemnise marriages for a specific period of time. If a member of a religious
or secular body wishes to be registered as a solemniser they must be nominated
by the appropriate body in Ireland. In general, this will be the head office
of the religious or secular body. Each religious and secular body has a
registered nominator who is responsible for ensuring the details held in the
Register of Solemnisers is accurately recorded by the General Register Office.
For example, in the case of a Roman Catholic priest, it will be the diocesan
office in the diocese in which the marriage is to take place.

Any updates or changes to details in the Register of Solemnisers (including
temporary arrangements) must be notified to the General Register Office by the
nominator of the body.

###  **Marriage venue**

Your choice of venue for the marriage ceremony depends on the type of marriage
you want and the availability of authorised venues.

All marriages (whether civil, religious or secular) must take place at venues
which are open to the public.

###  Marriage ceremony

While the marriage ceremony can be performed according to the customs and
rites of the religious or secular body, as part of the ceremony you and your
intended spouse must make 2 declarations:

  * That you do not know of any reason you should not marry (impediment to the marriage) 
  * That you accept each other as husband/wife/spouse 

###  Witnesses

The ceremony must be performed in the presence of 2 witnesses aged 18 or over.

###  Registering the marriage

How you [ register your marriage ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
married/registration-of-marriage/) depends on the type of ceremony you have.
If you marry in a religious or secular ceremony, immediately after the
marriage ceremony, the Marriage Registration Form (MRF) should be signed by
you and your spouse, the 2 witnesses and the person who has solemnised the
marriage. You should return the MRF within one month to a registrar for the
marriage to be registered. It does not have to be returned to the registrar
who issued it. Some [ Civil Registration Services
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/find-a-civil-
registration-service/) have a walk-in service. You need to phone and book an
appointment for others. You will not be able to get your marriage certificate
until you return the MRF to a registrar and the marriage is civilly
registered.

###  Use of interpreter

If either you, your intended spouse, either of the two witness or the
solemniser does not have sufficient knowledge of the language in which the
ceremony is being held to understand the ceremony, then the services of an
interpreter must be provided.

##  Further information

Visit gov.ie for more information on what you need to do if you are [ planning
to get married in Ireland ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/ac59d3-get-married-
in-ireland/#getting-married-in-ireland) .

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 10 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-marriage-
ceremonies/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Religious%20and%20secular%20marriage%20ceremonies&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-marriage-
ceremonies/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-marriage-
ceremonies/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Religious%20and%20secular%20marriage%20ceremonies&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/religious-and-secular-marriage-
ceremonies/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Civil marriage ceremonies_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/civil-marriage-ceremony/)

A civil marriage ceremony is a non-religious, legally-binding way to get
married in Ireland. Read the steps for getting married by civil ceremony in
Ireland, including how to notify the Registrar.

2487.094

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

1586.6838

  * [ _Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)

There are 3 different ways to legally marry in Ireland.

1316.9341

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

