**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Children's rights and policy ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/) > The Ombudsman for Children

#  The Ombudsman for Children

  * What is an ombudsman? 
  * The Ombudsman for Children 
  * Making a complaint 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Further information 

##  What is an ombudsman?

An ombudsman is a person who has been appointed to investigate complaints
about services and organisations to make sure your rights are upheld and
respected. Ombudsmen are independent, free and impartial.

There are different ombudsmen with responsibility for investigating complaints
about different services and organisations. For example, the [ Garda Síochána
Ombudsman Commission (GSOC) ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-
ombudsman-commission/) deals with complaints from the public about members of
the Garda Síochána (the Irish police force). The [ Financial Services and
Pensions Ombudsman ](https://www.fspo.ie/) investigates complaints about
financial service providers and pension providers.

##  The Ombudsman for Children

The [ Ombudsman for Children’s Office (OCO) ](https://www.oco.ie/) promotes
the rights and welfare of children and young people under 18 years of age
living in Ireland. It investigates complaints made by children, or on behalf
of children, about services they receive from public organisations in Ireland,
such as schools, local authorities, the HSE, or Tusla.

The Ombudsman for Children in Ireland is a statutory office established under
the [ Ombudsman for Children Act 2002
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2002/act/22/enacted/en/html) .

###  How does the OCO promote the rights and welfare of children?

The OCO highlights issues that concern children, and monitors and reviews
legislation, Government policies, and how they affect children. The OCO
advises Government, and other organisations delivering services on behalf of
the Government, to help make sure laws and policies respect children’s rights.

The OCO also supports and encourages [ children and young people to find out
about their rights ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-
policy/children-and-rights-in-ireland/) and how they can be protected and
realised.

##  Making a complaint

The OCO complaints service is free and independent.

Before making a complaint, you must contact the organisation directly and go
through their complaints procedure. It is important that you wait for a final
decision or reply to your complaint.

If you are not happy with the response from the organisation, you can make a
complaint to the OCO. You can also make a complaint to the OCO if the service
has not responded to your complaint when the service said it would.

In most cases, the complaint must be received by the OCO within 2 years of the
action or event in order to investigate.

###  Which bodies can the OCO investigate?

The OCO can investigate complaints about public bodies in the Republic of
Ireland providing services or making decisions about children and families, or
organisations providing services on behalf of the State.

###  Who can make a complaint?

Anyone can make a complaint to the OCO. The OCO can accept complaints from
children and young people under the age of 18, and also from adults on
children’s behalf.

Most complaints come from parents but people working with children such as
residential care staff, social workers and teachers also make complaints on
behalf of children. If a parent is not making the complaint, the OCO must
inform one parent that a complaint is being made.

##  How to make a complaint

You can make a complaint in different ways.

  * You can fill out an [ online complaint form ](https://www.oco.ie/complaints/make-a-complaint/online-complaint-form/) . 
  * Or, you can print off a copy of the [ complaint form document (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2017/09/14057_oco_complaintform_english_web.pdf) and post it to the OCO at the Ombudsman for Children’s Office, Millennium House, 52-56 Great Strand Street, Dublin 1. The form can also be emailed to [ ococomplaint@oco.ie ](mailto:ococomplaint@oco.ie)
  * Or, you can call Freephone 1800 20 20 40 and ask for a complaint form to be sent to you. A caseworker can also go through the form with you if you need help. 

The complaint form is also available in the following languages:

  * [ Irish (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2020/03/15018_oco_complaint-form_GAEILGE_ART.pdf)
  * [ Ukrainian (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2022/05/OCO-complaint-form-English_Ukrainian.pdf)
  * [ Russian (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2022/05/OCO-complaint-form-English_Russian.pdf)
  * [ Urdu (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2018/01/oco_complaintform_urdu.pdf)
  * [ Arabic (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2018/01/oco_complaintform_arabic.pdf)
  * [ Polish (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2018/01/oco_complaintform_polish.pdf)
  * [ Dari (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2018/01/oco_complaintform_dari.pdf)
  * [ Bengali (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2018/01/oco_complaintform_bengali.pdf)
  * [ Romanian (pdf) ](https://www.oco.ie/app/uploads/2020/02/Serviciul-GRATUIT-%C8%99i-INDEPENDENT-de-Gestionare-a-Pl%C3%A2ngerilor.pdf)

You should include any documents you sent or received from the service you
made the complaint to, and give the reasons why you are not satisfied with the
outcome of your complaint. If the OCO needs more information, they will get in
touch with you.

The Ombudsman for Children is not able to investigate complaints where legal
proceedings have already started.

###  Appealing a decision by the OCO

If you think that the OCO decision on your complaint (after it has been
investigated) is incorrect, you can appeal the decision. [ Contact the OCO
](https://www.oco.ie/contact-us/) for informtion on how to appeal a OCO
decision.

##  Further information

###  Ombudsman for Children

Millennium House  
52-56 Great Strand Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 F5P8  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 865 6800

**Locall:** Freefone 1800 20 20 40

**Homepage:** [ http://www.oco.ie/ ](http://www.oco.ie/)

**Email:** [ oco@oco.ie ](mailto:oco@oco.ie)

_**Page edited:** 18 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/the-ombudsman-for-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=The%20Ombudsman%20for%20Children&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/the-ombudsman-for-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/the-ombudsman-for-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=The%20Ombudsman%20for%20Children&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/the-ombudsman-for-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Office of the Ombudsman_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/)

The main duty of the Irish Ombudsman is to investigate complaints made by
members of the public about how they have been treated by public bodies in
Ireland.

2890.2598

  * [ _Children and the criminal justice system_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/)

The Children Act 2001 regulates the treatment of children found in breach of
the criminal law.

1913.7091

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1852.2988

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

