**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Problems in marriages and other relationships
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/) > Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship

#  Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship

  * Introduction 
  * Your property rights if you are married 
  * Your property rights if you are not married 
  * Getting legal advice 

##  Introduction

When a relationship ends, you may have questions about your property rights,
including ‘ _who gets the house_ ,’ and ‘ _what about the children?_ ’

This is a complex area of law, and the answers to these questions depend on a
range of factors, including:

  * Your _marital status_ (whether you are married or not married) 
  * Whether you and your partner can agree on the terms of your break-up 
  * Whether one name, or both names, are on the title deeds to the house 
  * Whether there are any children and if they need to be provided for 

This page explains your property rights depending on your personal situation.

You can also read about property ownership in our pages on [ family homes
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/) and [ joint ownership of property ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/) .

##  Your property rights if you are married

If the house was bought and the title deeds are in both your name and your
spouse’s name, you are joint owners. This is also known as a _joint tenancy_ .
In this case, you and your partner can agree to either:

  * Sell the property and split the proceeds (money) after any outstanding mortgage is paid 
  * ‘Buy out’ your partner’s share of the property so that you become the sole owner. If there is a mortgage on the home, you will have to get the agreement of the bank. 

It is important to remember that if you took out a mortgage with your spouse
or partner, you are _jointly liable_ for the mortgage payments. Even if your
spouse stops paying, you are still responsible for the whole amount.

[ Family mediation ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/) can help you come to an
agreement on how you manage your affairs when your marriage breaks down,
including the division of your assets.

You do not have to be a _legal owner_ (have your name on the title deeds) of
the family home to have a legal right to the property after marriage
breakdown. It all depends on the surrounding facts. Matters such as each
person’s contribution (financial and otherwise) to the home and the family
will be very important.

You cannot sell, mortgage, lease or transfer your family home without the
_consent_ (permission) of your spouse. This is set out in the [ Family Home
Protection Act 1976
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1976/act/27/enacted/en/html) as amended
by the [ Family Law Act 1995
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/act/26/enacted/en/html) . Similar
protection is provided for the shared home of civil partners in civil
partnership legislation. These provisions do not apply to cohabiting couples.  

###  Property adjustment order

If you are married and applying for [ judicial separation ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/judicial-separation/) or [ divorce
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) ,
and you cannot agree on what happens to the house, the court will make a
_property adjustment order_ . This is where **the court decides** what happens
to the property.

The court will [ consider a range of factors ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/factors-in-separation-divorce/) before
making a property adjustment order, including your financial and accommodation
needs. Depending on these factors, the court will decide which assets (or
percentage of the assets) you and your spouse should get.

###  Pre-nuptial agreements

A [ pre-nuptial agreement ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
married/pre-nuptial-agreements/) (also called an _ante-nuptial agreement_ ) is
an agreement between two people who plan to marry each other. It relates to
property, maintenance and custody arrangements in the event of marriage
breakdown.

A court must make sure that spouses and children are adequately taken care of
when a marriage breaks down. A pre-nuptial agreement is not legally binding,
but it can serve as a guide for the courts on what the parties’ intentions
were at the outset of the marriage in judicial separation and divorce cases.

##  Your property rights if you are not married

If you are _cohabiting_ (living together but not married) and your
relationship breaks down, the family home will belong to the person who holds
the legal title to the home. This could be one of you, or both of you.

###  You are not married but your name is on the title deeds

If both your names are on the title deeds, you are both legal owners of the
property. You jointly have to make decisions as to what will happen to the
property.

If you cannot come to an agreement, you can apply to the court to have the
property sold and the proceeds divided, or it may be possible to seek an order
breaking up the property. This would allow each party to decide what to do
with their portion. This may be possible where there is a lot of land
connected to the family home, or if there is more than one residence on the
property.

###  Your name is not on the title deeds but you made contributions to the
purchase of the house

Whether you are married or not, if your name is not on the title deeds to the
house, you may still be able to show that you have some ownership rights in
relation to the house.

These rights are based on the fact that you may have made a contribution,
(either directly or indirectly), to the purchase price of the house with the
intention of gaining a share in the ownership of the house. Usually, if you
can show that you made a contribution to the purchase price of the house, you
will be entitled to a share in the house in some proportion to your
contribution.

For example, if you paid off half of the mortgage (and the mortgage
represented 90% of the purchase price), you may roughly be entitled to 45% of
the ownership of the property.

###  Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act
2010

The [ Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act
2010 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2010/act/24/enacted/en/html) sets
out certain legal rights and protections that cohabiting couples have, which
may allow you seek redress in the courts. To qualify for any [ redress
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/) orders, such as a
property adjustment order, cohabiting couples without children have to have
lived together in an intimate and committed relationship for 5 years. If you
have children together, it is 2 years.

A court will only make such an order if it is satisfied that one partner was
financially dependent on the other cohabitant partner.

###  Cohabitation agreements

The Act also provides for couples to enter into a "cohabitation agreement" to
set out your financial interests and also determine what will happen with
certain assets, such as property, if your relationship should end.

A cohabitant’s agreement can make things more straightforward in the event of
a break-up. A court may _vary_ (change aspects of) or _set aside_ a
cohabitants’ agreement in exceptional circumstances where enforcing it would
cause serious injustice.

###  What if there are children involved?

If there are children involved, a relationship breakdown can be life-altering.
It needs to be handled sensitively to ensure the children’s best interests are
prioritised.

Often, if a married couple with children are separating, the person who looks
after the children the majority of the time will get to stay in the family
home until the youngest child reaches 18 years old (or 23 if they are in full-
time education).

Dependent children of civil partners are protected in a similar way under the
[ Children and Family Relationships Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/9/enacted/en/html) .

If the parents cannot agree who the child will live with, the court can make
orders in relation to [ custody and access ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-and-divorce-children/) .

##  Getting legal advice

It is important to get professional legal advice before making any decisions
in relation to property and other assets.

Solicitors' fees can vary considerably so shop around and get some quotes
before deciding who to use. Find [ contact details for solicitors
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/) on the Law Society website.

Contact [ your nearest law centre ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/contact-
us/find-a-law-centre/) for information on Legal Aid. If you are eligible for [
legal aid and advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-
and-legal-aid/) from the Legal Aid Board, you must pay a contribution towards
costs.

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) ](https://www.flac.ie/index.html) is an
independent, voluntary organisation that operates a network of legal advice
clinics throughout the country. These clinics are confidential, free of charge
and open to all. Contact your nearest Citizens Information Centre for
information on FLAC services in your area. FLAC also runs an information and
referral line during office hours for basic legal information.

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 8 June 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-
rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Property%20rights%20and%20the%20breakdown%20of%20a%20relationship&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-
rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-
and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Property%20rights%20and%20the%20breakdown%20of%20a%20relationship&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-
rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Property rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

This page explains the property rights of cohabiting couples, for example, in
relation to buying a home together, making a cohabitation agreement, applying
for local authority housing, and getting legal advice.

2192.5967

  * [ _Breakdown of a marriage or other relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-relationship/)

The breakdown of a marriage or other relationship is a difficult and traumatic
process. This page outlines the issues that may arise.

2137.5234

  * [ _Custody of children after relationship breakdown_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-of-children-cohabiting-couples/)

When the parents of a child separate and cannot agree on who should have
custody of the child, the court will decide. Find out about the law regarding
the custody of children of non-marital relationships.

1968.1138

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

