**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/) > Rights of cohabiting couples (couples
living together)

#  Rights of cohabiting couples (couples living together)

  * Introduction 
  * What is cohabitation? 
  * What rights does a cohabiting partner have? 
  * Redress scheme for cohabiting couples 
  * Preparing for the future with a cohabitation agreement 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Your legal rights as a partner depend on whether you are married, in a civil
partnership or living together. In general, you have fewer rights if you're
living together than if you're married or in a civil partnership.

##  What is cohabitation?

Living together with someone is also sometimes called ‘cohabitation’.

A cohabiting couple is a couple that lives together in an intimate and
committed relationship, who are not married to each other and not in a civil
partnership. Cohabiting couples can be opposite-sex or same-sex. A cohabiting
relationship can continue to be ‘intimate’ even if it is not sexual.

If you live together you may sometimes be described as common-law husband and
wife. There is no such thing as a common-law husband and wife in Irish
legislation. However, couples living together now have certain rights if the
relationship ends (through death or separation), though this depends on how
long you have lived together and if you have children together (see [ Redress
scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-
marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/) ).

##  What rights does a cohabiting partner have?

While couples living together now have certain rights in the event of the
death of either partner, or the breakup of your relationship, cohabiting
couples do not have the same legal rights and obligations as [ married couples
](/en/birth-family-relationships/married-couples/how-marriage-changes-your-
legal-status/) or [ civil partnerships ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-
partnerships/civil-partnerships/) . This has a bearing on important life
events, including buying property, having children and inheritance.

For example, if you are living with your partner and you die without a will,
your partner has no automatic right to any share of your estate (property,
money and possessions) no matter how long you have been together.

Even if your partner has provided for you in their will, cohabiting partners
pay [ Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) at 33% on gifts/inheritance over €16,250.
However, if you receive a gift or inheritance from your spouse (your husband
or your wife) or your civil partner, you are exempt from Capital Acquisitions
Tax (CAT).

Given the legal differences between being married and living together, this
page signposts you to some of the issues you should consider if you are living
with your partner:

  * [ Property rights ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/)
  * [ Property rights after the breakdown of a cohabiting relationship ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)
  * [ Redress scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/)
  * [ The legal guardianship of children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/guardianship-and-cohabiting-couples/)
  * [ The custody of children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-of-children-cohabiting-couples/)
  * [ Access rights relating to children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-cohabiting-couples/)
  * [ Adoption ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/domestic-adoption/#90604a)
  * [ Fostering ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/#l67c2f)
  * [ Inheritance rights ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/)
  * [ Maintenance ](/en/birth-family-relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-parents/)
  * [ Cohabitation agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/pre-nuptial-agreements/)

##  Redress scheme for cohabiting couples

If you have been living with your partner and your relationship ends, you may
be able to avail of the [ Redress scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-
scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/) . The aim of the redress scheme is to protect
a financially dependent member of the couple if the long-term cohabiting
relationship ends (either through death or separation).

Under the redress scheme, cohabiting couples can get similar orders from the
court as are available to married couples when they separate or divorce if the
court is satisfied that one of you was financially dependent on the other. The
types of orders you may apply for under the redress scheme include property
adjustment orders, maintenance orders and pension adjustment orders.

To apply for court orders under the redress scheme, you must be a qualified
cohabitant. This means you must have been:

  * Living together in an intimate and committed relationship for at least 5 years, or 
  * Living together in an intimate and committed relationship for 2 years if you have had a child with your partner 

You must apply for these orders within two years of your relationship ending,
unless there are exceptional circumstances. The rules of the scheme are set
out in the Cohabitants are defined in the [ Civil Partnership and Certain
Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) .

###  Inheritance

In certain circumstances, if your partner dies when you are still in a
relationship together, you can apply to the court for a portion of their
estate, but it is _not_ necessary to prove that you were financially dependent
on them. You must apply within 6 months after the probate or administration is
first granted.

If your relationship ended 2 years or more before the death or your ex-
partner, you may only apply to the court for a portion of their estate if you
were financially dependent on them, for example, you had been getting a
maintenance payment from them, or had applied to the court for a maintenance,
property or pension adjustment order.

A gift or inheritance taken on foot of a court order under [ Part 15 of the
Civil Partnerships and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2010/act/24/enacted/en/print#part15) is
exempt from Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT).

Some examples to which the CAT exemption apply are:

  * Transfer of property 
  * Maintenance payments 
  * Property or pension adjustment orders 
  * A benefit from the net estate of a deceased cohabitant 

###  Dwelling House Exemption

If you qualify for the [ Dwelling House Exemption
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-
exemptions/dwelling-house/index.aspx) , it may be possible to inherit the
family home from your deceased partner without paying Capital Acquisitions Tax
(CAT) if:

  * The property is/was your principal private residence for 3 years prior to the gift or inheritance 
  * You have no other beneficial interest in any other residential property at the date of the inheritance 
  * You remain living in the property for 6 years after the gift or inheritance. This does not apply if you are over 65 year of age. 

If the Dwelling House Exemption does not apply, you may be liable to pay 33%
CAT on the value of any inheritance that exceeds €16,250.

##  Preparing for the future with a cohabitation agreement

If you live with your partner and you do not intend to marry, you can protect
your financial interests by entering into a ‘cohabitation agreement’ (also
called a cohabitant’s agreement). This is a voluntary, signed agreement, which
allows you to specify the day-to-day joint financial arrangements of your
relationship.

You can also specify how you plan to separate your assets, such as shared
property, should the relationship come to an end. You both need to get
independent legal advice for the agreement to be valid. The advantage of a
cohabitation agreement is that you prepare for future events while your
relationship is still amicable. This should mean the plans you make are fair
and reasonable to both of you.  

##  Further information

These are complex matters with serious implications for your financial
security, so it is importance to get advice from a qualified professional such
as a solicitor or financial advisor on your specific circumstances. Advice is
also available from:

###  Treoir

28 North Great Georges Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (01) 670 0120

**Homepage:** [ http://www.treoir.ie ](http://www.treoir.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.treoir.ie/contact-contact.php
](http://www.treoir.ie/contact-contact.php)

**Email:** [ info@treoir.ie ](mailto:info@treoir.ie)

###  One Family

8 Coke Lane  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 662 9212

**Locall:** 0818 66 22 12

**Homepage:** [ https://onefamily.ie/ ](https://onefamily.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@onefamily.ie ](mailto:info@onefamily.ie)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

_**Page edited:** 14 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rights%20of%20cohabiting%20couples%20%28couples%20living%20together%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Rights%20of%20cohabiting%20couples%20%28couples%20living%20together%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Inheritance rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

Cohabiting couples have no automatic right to inheritance on the death of
either partner. What are your rights, and find out how you can plan and make
provisions for dependants.

2829.1682

  * [ _Property rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

This page explains the property rights of cohabiting couples, for example, in
relation to buying a home together, making a cohabitation agreement, applying
for local authority housing, and getting legal advice.

2672.964

  * [ _Rights of same-sex couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-same-sex-couples/)

What are the rights, entitlements and obligations of same-sex couples.

2461.7231

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

