**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Married couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/married-couples/) > Marital status and social welfare
entitlements

#  Marital status and social welfare entitlements

  * Introduction 
  * One-Parent Family Payment 
  * Jobseeker's Transitional Payment 
  * Widow's/Widower's or Surviving CivilPartner's Pension 
  * Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner’s Grant 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

For the purposes of most social welfare payments in Ireland (for example, [
Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/) and [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) ), couples
who are cohabiting (living together) are treated in the same way as married
couples or civil partners. However, your marital status can affect your
entitlement to certain social welfare payments.

##  One-Parent Family Payment

[ One-Parent Family Payment (OFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/one-parent-family-payment/) is not paid to a person who is in a
relationship and living with that person whether they are of the opposite or
of the same sex. To qualify for OFP, you must be widowed, separated, divorced,
unmarried, have a dissolved civil partnership, or be a prisoner’s spouse or
civil partner. You must not be cohabiting. Cohabiting is when a couple in a
relationship live together, but they are not married or in a civil
partnership.

If you separate, divorce or dissolve your civil partnership, you must live
apart for at least 3 months before making a claim for One-Parent Family
Payment. If you are cohabiting and your relationship breaks down, you can
apply without having to wait 3 months.

##  Jobseeker's Transitional Payment

You may get [ Jobseeker’s Transitional Payment (JST) ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/) , if you have
children and do not qualify for OFP.

You cannot get JST if you are living with your spouse, partner or civil
partner. If you are married and separate, you must be separated for 3 months
before you can get Jobseeker’s Transitional Payment .

If you are cohabiting (living with someone and in a relationship) and your
relationship breaks down, you can apply for Jobseeker's Transitional Payment
from the first day you become a lone parent.

##  Widow's/Widower's or Surviving CivilPartner's Pension

Your marital status does affect your entitlement to [ Widow's/Widower's or
Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/) or [ Widow's/Widower's or
Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/) . You can
only claim a Widow's/Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension if your
spouse or civil partner dies. The pension remains payable while you remain
widowed or a surviving civil partner. If you re-marry or start to cohabit, it
is no longer payable.

##  Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner’s Grant

Your marital status affects your entitlement to the [ Widowed or Surviving
Civil Partner’s Grant ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-
parents-bereavement-grant/) .

The Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant is a once-off payment to widows,
widowers or surviving civil partners with dependent children. Cohabitants are
not eligible for the grant.

##  More information

Further information about how your marital status can affect your entitlements
is available from [ your local social welfare office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/service/40cf48-find-your-local-intreo-
office/) . Staff can explain your entitlements and help you to fill in forms.
In the case of Supplementary Welfare Allowance, contact the Community Welfare
Officer in [ your local Intreo centre or social welfare branch office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/service/40cf48-find-your-local-intreo-
office/) .

_**Page edited:** 28 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-social-welfare-
entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Marital%20status%20and%20social%20welfare%20entitlements&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-social-welfare-
entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-social-welfare-
entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Marital%20status%20and%20social%20welfare%20entitlements&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-social-welfare-
entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Marital status and inheritance_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-inheritance/)

This page describes how being married affects your inheritance rights.

2022.3214

  * [ _Changes that can affect your social welfare payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/)

A change in your circumstances can affect your entitlement to a social welfare
payment. This document gives some examples of the changes that can affect your
social welfare payment.

1815.5

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

1682.6587

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

