**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Civil partnerships ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/civil-partnerships/) > Civil partnerships

#  Civil partnerships

  * Introduction 
  * Marriage Act 2015 
  * Register of civil partnerships 
  * How civil partnership changes your legal status 
  * Ending a civil partnership 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

A statutory civil partnership registration scheme for same-sex couples was
introduced in January 2011 under the [ Civil Partnership and Certain Rights
and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) . The Act
sets out the rights and obligations that civil partners have towards each
other. These are broadly the same as the rights and obligations of married
couples towards each other. The Act did not change the law on issues relating
to children, for example, guardianship, adoption, custody, access or
maintenance.

Civil partners are treated in the same way as married couples under the tax
and social welfare codes. Revenue has details of the [ tax treatment and
assessment of married couples and civil partners
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/life-events-and-personal-circumstances/marital-
status/marriage-and-civil-partnerships/index.aspx) on its website.

Civil partnerships which were registered in other countries and which met
certain criteria were also recognised in Ireland.

##  Marriage Act 2015

Following the commencement of the [ Marriage Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/35/enacted/en/html) on 16
November 2015, you can no longer register a civil partnership in Ireland.
Couples already in a civil partnership can [ apply to marry ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/getting-married/) or remain as they are.
If you decide to marry, your civil partnership is automatically dissolved.

Civil partnerships registered abroad since 16 May 2016 are not recognised in
Ireland.

You can find more information on the [ Department of Justice website
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/PR15000577) .

##  Register of civil partnerships

The [ General Register Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/af7893-general-register-office/) maintains a
register of civil partnerships, a register of decrees of dissolution of civil
partnerships and a register of nullity of civil partnerships. The registration
rules and processes were similar to those for the registration of a civil
marriage, annulments of marriage and divorce.

##  How civil partnership changes your legal status

A registered civil partnership is a legally binding civil contract. It gives
rise to many far-reaching legal consequences which are generally similar to
the legal consequences of getting married.

Civil partnership changes your entitlements and obligations regarding:

  * Social welfare 
  * Tax 
  * Life insurance and pensions 
  * Inheritance 
  * Maintenance 
  * Shared home 
  * Barring, safety and protection orders 

###  Other consequences of civil partnership

**Civil liability:** A surviving civil partner may sue for the wrongful death
of their civil partner, where the death was caused by the negligence or
wrongdoing of another person and has resulted in injury or mental distress to
the survivor.

**Mental health:** A civil partner may apply for the involuntary admission to
a psychiatric institution of a mentally ill civil partner (provided the
parties are not separated and provided the applicant has not been the subject
of an application under the Domestic Violence Acts).

**Power of attorney:** A civil partner must be informed of the registration of
an enduring power of attorney. Similarly, an enduring power of attorney in
favour of a civil partner is no longer valid if the partnership is dissolved
or there is a safety or barring order against the civil partner.

**Property disputes:** A civil partner may apply to the courts for a decision
in relation to disputes over property with their partner.

**Tenancies:** Under the Residential Tenancies Act 2004, a civil partner may
be able to take over a tenancy on the death of their partner.

**Former spouses who entered into civil partnerships:** If you were married to
someone and the marriage ended, and then you entered into a civil partnership
with someone else, you lose your status as a former spouse. Under divorce
legislation, former spouses continue to have the right to go to the courts for
maintenance and property orders. However, once a former spouse entered into a
civil partnership, this changed. Maintenance orders and pension adjustment
orders in favour of a former spouse lapsed if that spouse entered into a civil
partnership. A property adjustment order may not be made for the benefit of a
former spouse if that spouse has entered into a registered civil partnership.

##  Ending a civil partnership

When a civil partnership breaks down, the civil partners may choose to
informally separate and live apart. However, most couples will eventually want
to regulate matters between them.

If a married couple or civil partners can agree the terms on which they will
live separately, they may enter into a [ separation agreement ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/) . The
agreement is a legally binding contract setting out each party's rights and
obligations to the other. The terms of the agreement are usually reached
either through mediation or negotiation through solicitors.

The courts are also able to dissolve civil partnerships in a similar way to
the granting of divorce. To grant a [ decree of dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/) , civil
partners must have been living apart* for 2 out of 3 years. However, the rules
governing the [ dissolution of civil partnerships ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/) are different.

Orders such as [ protection orders ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-
in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders/) ,
[ maintenance orders ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/) and [ pension adjustment orders
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)
can be made during court proceedings for the dissolution of civil partnerships
in the same way as they can in judicial separation and divorce proceedings.

Unlike divorce proceedings, the civil partners’ legal advisers do not have to
discuss the possibility of reconciliation, mediation or other alternatives to
dissolution. The court may, however, adjourn proceedings to facilitate these
alternatives.

In specific circumstances, the courts are able to grant a [ decree of nullity
of civil partnership ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-
partnerships/nullity-of-civil-partnership/) in broadly the same way as decrees
of nullity of marriage are granted.

###  *Living apart

The [ Family Law Act 2019 (pdf)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/act/37/enacted/en/pdf) provides a
definition of ‘living apart’ to give certainty to the interpretation of the
term in the Irish courts. It clarifies that civil partners who live in the
same home as one another are considered to be living apart if they are not
living together as a couple in an intimate and committed relationship. The Act
also sets out that a relationship does not cease to be an intimate
relationship merely because the relationship is no longer sexual in nature.

##  Further information

###  Courts Service

15-24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 F95Y  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://courts.ie/ ](https://courts.ie/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us
](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 8 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-
partnerships/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Civil%20partnerships&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-
partnerships/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-
partnerships/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Civil%20partnerships&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-
partnerships/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Civil partnership and inheritance_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-partnership-and-inheritance/)

This page describes your right to inheritance in a civil partnership.

1843.9376

  * [ _Nullity of civil partnership_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/nullity-of-civil-partnership/)

Nullity of civil partnership means that a court has declared that no valid
civil partnership exists between youa and your partner. Find out more.

1628.7799

  * [ _Dissolution decree to end a civil partnership_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/)

A dissolution decree formally ends a civil partnership. Certain conditions
must be met before a court can grant a dissolution.

1428.36

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

