**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > Getting a birth, marriage or death certificate in
Ireland

#  Getting a birth, marriage or death certificate in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Types of certificates 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 
  * Family research 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

It is a legal requirement in Ireland that a record is kept of each birth,
marriage and death that occurs in the State. When a birth, death, marriage or
adoption is recorded in Ireland, a certificate is issued to the people
concerned (for example, the parents if it is a birth, the couple if it is a
marriage and the next-of-kin if it is a death). This record is a very
important legal document and should be kept in a safe place. For example, a
birth certificate is required if you want to enrol your child in school or [
apply for an Irish passport ](/en/travel-and-recreation/passports/applying-
for-or-renewing-an-irish-passport/) . A death certificate is required if you
are [ dealing with the deceased person's estate ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-
estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

The [ General Register Office ](https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/General-
Register-Office.aspx/) is where records relating to births, stillbirths,
deaths, marriages, civil partnerships and adoptions in Ireland are kept.

The General Register Office is responsible for the overall administration of
the civil registration service in Ireland. The HSE is responsible for the day-
to-day delivery of the service through local [ Civil Registration Service
offices ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-
civil-registration-service.html) .

##  Types of certificates

Birth, marriage, adoption, civil partnership and death certificates are public
records, meaning anybody can access or apply for them.

There are different types of certificates available from the General Register
Office.

**Type of certificate** |  **Purpose**  
---|---  
Full standard long form certificate  |  This is a certified copy of an entry in the register. It is the certificate used for legal and administrative purposes.   
Photocopy  |  Photocopies contain the same information as the certificate but you can only use them for research purposes.   
Authenticated  |  This is needed in certain circumstances only (in addition to the certified copy).   
Multilingual Standard Form (MSF)  |  An MSF provides a translation of a birth, death, marriage or civil partnership certificate so it can be used in another EU member state. The MSF itself has no legal effect. You must indicate which EU language you need and request it when applying for the certificate from the General Register Office or any Civil Registration Service.   
  
From 2019, [ public documents
](https://beta.e-justice.europa.eu/551/EN/public_documents) such as birth,
marriage, adoption, civil partnership or death certificates issued in an EU
country must be accepted as authentic by the authorities in another EU member
state without the need to carry an ‘Apostille’ or authenticity stamp.

If your certificate is required for use outside the EU, you can apply to the
General Register Office in Roscommon to have a new certificate issued with an
authentication stamp applied at the same time. Alternatively, if you already
have your certificate you can send it to the General Register Office to have
an authentication applied.  

##  Rates

There is no charge for [ registering a birth ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/) (including
re-registering a birth to include a parent's details), [ registering a
marriage ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/registration-of-
marriage/) or [ registering a death ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-
a-death/registering-a-death/) .

There are fees for birth, adoption, marriage, civil partnership and death
certificates, or photocopies of these certificates.

The fees charged for issuing a certificate are:

  * €20 for a full standard certificate 
  * €5 for an uncertified photocopy of an entry in the Register 
  * €10 to have a certificate authenticated (only available from the General Register Office) 
  * €20 for a certified copy of an entry in the Adopted Children Register (can be used for legal and administrative purposes). This is only available from the General Register Office. 
  * €30 for a new certificate with an authentication stamp 
  * €0 (no fee) for a Multilingual Standard Form (MSF) 

##  How to apply

You can apply for a birth, marriage, adoption, civil partnership and death
certificate online. Only full standard certificates are available online. You
can also apply for full standard certificates or copies of these certificates
by post, email or in person at a Civil Registration Service office or the
General Register Office – see ‘Where to apply’ below.

###  Applying for a certificate online

You can [ apply for a certificate online ](https://certificatespublic-webapp-
prod.azurewebsites.net/) , including domestic adoptions and stillbirths that
have been registered.

###  Applying for a certificate or copy in person or by post

You can apply for a certificate or copy of a certificate in person in any [
Civil Registration Service ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/births-deaths-and-
marriages/civil-registration-services/hse-civil-registration-service-births-
deaths-and-marriages.html) . Some Civil Registration Services have a walk-in
service. You need to phone and book an appointment for others.

To apply for a certificate or copy of a certificate by post, fill in the [
application form (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/41368/54a468251ce84642b6d14043ca5a481c.pdf) . Post the
completed form to [ your local Civil Registration Service
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-
registration-service.html) or the General Register Office – see ‘Where to
apply’ below.

###  Applying for a certificate or copy by phone

You can order and pay for a certificate by phone in [ most Civil Registration
Offices ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-
civil-registration-service.html) around Ireland (except Dublin, Kildare and
Wicklow). Your phone order should be processed within 5 working days.

###  Applying for a certificate or copy by email

To apply for a certificate or copy by email, download the [ email application
form (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/41368/54a468251ce84642b6d14043ca5a481c.pdf)
. Fill in the form electronically and email it to [
GROonlinepayments@welfare.ie ](mailto:GROonlinepayments@welfare.ie) .

When the General Register Office receives your email application, you will get
an email back with a secure payment link allowing you to pay the fee due using
a debit or credit card. If the certificate you want cannot be located, your
card will be refunded the full fee.

Find more information about [ how to apply for certificates
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/124a70-apply-for-
certificates/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Apply-for-
Certificates.aspx) on gov.ie.

##  Where to apply

You can find the [ contact details for Civil Registration Services
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/bdm/contactus/) on the HSE website.
Alternatively, you can order certificates from the [ General Register Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/124a70-apply-for-certificates/) .

##  Family research

The General Register Office has a family research facility in the [ GRO
Research Room ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/55ccbe-general-
register-office-gro-research-facility/) at Werburgh Street, Dublin 2, where
you can search the indexes to the registers and buy photocopies of records.

If you want to order certified copies of entries, you can do so from the
General Register Office in Roscommon (see contact details below).

The Research Room has a walk-in service on Tuesdays only, from 10am - 12.30pm,
and from 2pm – 4.30pm. An email service is available 5 days a week at [
GROResearchRoom@welfare.ie ](mailto:GROResearchRoom@welfare.ie) . **Note:**
There is no walk-in service available at the Research Rooms from the 25 June
2024 due to urgent repair works on the building. The walk in service will re-
open on Tuesday, 27 August 2024. The Research Rooms continues to offer a full
email service.

You can search the indexes to the registers including:

  * Births registered on the island of Ireland between 1 January 1864 and 31 December 1921 inclusive, and in the Republic of Ireland from 1922 onwards 
  * Deaths registered on the island of Ireland between 1 January 1864 and 31 December 1921 inclusive and in the Republic of Ireland from 1922 onwards 
  * Marriages registered on the island of Ireland between 1 April 1845 and 31 December 1921 inclusive and in the Republic of Ireland from 1922 onwards 
  * Domestic adoptions registered in Ireland from 10 July 1953 onwards 

You can also find historic church and civil records of Irish births, marriages
and deaths on [ irishgenealogy.ie ](https://www.irishgenealogy.ie/en/) .

  * Births 1864-1923 
  * Marriages 1845*-1948 
  * Deaths 1871-1973 

*Civil registration of marriages in the Roman Catholic church only began in 1864. 

##  Further information

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-
certificate/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Getting%20a%20birth%2C%20marriage%20or%20death%20certificate%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-
certificate/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-
certificate/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Getting%20a%20birth%2C%20marriage%20or%20death%20certificate%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-
certificate/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Electricity: getting connected or switching_ ](/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-services/)

With so many suppliers to choose from, connecting to an electricity provider
can be daunting. This page guides you through the process, and helps you to
avoid any nasty shocks.

1425.423

  * [ _Breakdown of a marriage or other relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-relationship/)

The breakdown of a marriage or other relationship is a difficult and traumatic
process. This page outlines the issues that may arise.

1328.4415

  * [ _Irish citizenship through birth or descent_ ](/en/moving-country/irish-citizenship/irish-citizenship-through-birth-or-descent/)

You are not automatically an Irish citizen if you were born on the island of
Ireland. You may be entitled to Irish citizenship if your parent(s) or
grandparents were Irish. You may be entitled to Irish citizenship if you were
born outside of Ireland, but you may need to register your birth.

1307.4495

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

