**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Parenting alone ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/) > Maintenance and lone parents

#  Maintenance and lone parents

  * Marital status and maintenance 
  * Children and maintenance 
  * Making a maintenance agreement 
  * How to apply for a maintenance order 
  * I have been served with a maintenance summons 
  * Preparing for court 
  * Further information 

##  Marital status and maintenance

If you are or have been married or in a civil partnership, you are entitled to
apply to the court for maintenance from your spouse/civil partner to cover
your own expenses.

If you are in a cohabiting relationship, you have no such right. If your
cohabiting relationship breaks down you may not apply to the court for
maintenance for yourself, unless you satisfy the eligibility criteria for the
[ Redress scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-
for-cohabiting-couples/) . You will have to show that you were/are financially
dependent on your partner.

##  Children and maintenance

Parents, whether married or not, must support their dependent children.

The [ Children and Family Relationships Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2015/en/act/pub/0009/index.html) has amended
the [ Family Law (Maintenance of Spouses and Children) Act 1976
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1976/en/act/pub/0011/index.html) so that a
cohabitant who is a [ guardian ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/guardianship-and-cohabiting-couples/)
of:

  * Their partner’s child, or 
  * The child their partner has the day-to-day care of 

has a financial responsibility to the child.

It allows for a court to order the cohabitant to pay maintenance to support a
dependent child who is under 18 years of age.

**What is a dependent child?**

A dependent child is a child who:

  * Is under 18 years old, or 
  * Is over 18 and under 23 years old but is still in full-time education, or 
  * Has a mental or physical disability to the extent that they cannot maintain themselves 

##  Making a maintenance agreement

There are 3 main ways that you can [ make a maintenance arrangement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/#a3dad6) :

  * A voluntary maintenance agreement 
  * A voluntary maintenance agreement using mediation or legal help 
  * A maintenance order 

If you have had a child outside of marriage and cannot come to a voluntary
maintenance agreement, you may apply to the court to order the other parent to
pay child maintenance. In most cases, it is the parent with main [ custody
](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-of-children-
cohabiting-couples/) of the child that makes such an application.

When the court is deciding whether to make a maintenance order in respect of a
child, it will consider the income, earning capacity, property and other
financial resources of both parties. It will also consider whether either
parent has other financial responsibilities such as a spouse or other
dependent children.

The children of parents who are not married to each other may have to [ prove
paternity ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/presumption-of-paternity/) in order to
get their maintenance or inheritance entitlements. This is not necessary if
the father acknowledges paternity or is named as the child's father on the
child’s birth certificate.

##  How to apply for a maintenance order

Most applications for maintenance are made in the District Court. In some
situations, an application can be made in the Circuit Court or the High Court.
Each court has its own rules on how to apply for a court order. Currently, in
the District Court a judge can only order a maximum of €150 per week per
child. The court order will specify how the maintenance is to be paid.

If you are making an application for maintenance in the District Court, you
can apply to the District Court office in the area you or the respondent is
working or living in.

The person making an application for maintenance to the court is called the
applicant. The person receiving an application is called the respondent.

The [ Courts Service ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance)
explains the steps involved in making an application to a District Court
office:

  1. Consider [ mediation and legal advice ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-1-consider-mediation-and-legal-advice)   
  
Before deciding to make a court application, you should consider reaching an
agreement with the help of a mediator or a solicitor.  
  

  2. Decide on [ court location ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-2-decide-on-court-location)   
  
You can apply to the District Court in the area where you or the respondent
lives or works.  
  

  3. Complete and [ submit the summons ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-3-complete-and-submit-the-summons)   
  
To apply for a maintenance order you must fill out a form called a summons and
ask the Courts Service to sign it.  
  

  4. [ Serve the summons ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-4-serve-the-summons-and-provide-proof-of-service) and provide proof of summons   
  
You must send a copy of the summons to the respondent. This is called serving.
You must also provide proof of service to the court.  
  

  5. Return [ documents to court office ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-5-return-documents-to-court-office)   
  
You must return the original summons and Statutory Declaration of Service to
the court office.  
  

  6. Attend [ court hearing ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-6-attend-court-hearing)   
  
You must attend the court hearing. The judge will hear the evidence and make a
decision. This is called a court order.  
  

  7. Receive a [ court order ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-outside-dublin/step-7-receive-a-court-order)   
  
After the court hearing, the court office will finalise the order and send a
copy to all parties.

If either of you live or work in Dublin, your local office may be the Dublin
District Court Family Law Office, also known as Dolphin House. The application
process for people [ making an application in Dolphin House
](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance/how-to-apply-for-a-
maintenance-order/how-to-apply-for-a-maintenance-order-dublin/step-2-book-
appointment-at-dolphin-house) is different to the process for the rest of the
country.

##  I have been served with a maintenance summons

If you have been served with a maintenance summons, it means that another
person is applying to the court for a maintenance order. The summons is a
command to attend court. You should read the summons and any included
documents very carefully. It will tell you the date, time, and place of the
court hearing. It will also tell you if you need to complete any documentation
before the court date.

If the applicant fails to attend court, the case may be struck out by the
judge. This means that the case will not go ahead and the applicant will have
to start the entire process again.

If you do not attend court, the judge may make an order in your absence. The
applicant may also ask the judge to issue a warrant to have you arrested and
brought to court. If the judge makes this order, the court office will send a
warrant to the Gardaí. When the Gardaí bring you before the court, the judge
will set a new date to deal with the case. The court office will notify the
applicant of this new date.

##  Preparing for court

The Courts Service has information to help you to [ prepare for attending a
family law court ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/preparing-for-family-
law-court/how-to-prepare-for-a-court-hearing) . Family law cases are heard in
camera. This means they are heard in private to protect the privacy of the
family. It does not mean they are filmed or videoed.

It also can be helpful to know:

  * [ Things you will need to do on the day of your hearing ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/preparing-for-family-law-court/what-to-do-on-the-day)
  * [ What happens in the court room ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/preparing-for-family-law-court/what-happens-in-the-courtroom)
  * [ Who to expect inside the court room ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/preparing-for-family-law-court/who-to-expect-inside-the-courtroom)
  * [ What happens when your hearing ends ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/preparing-for-family-law-court/what-happens-when-a-hearing-ends)

You have [ the right to appeal ](https://services.courts.ie/Family-
Law/appealing-a-court-decision/appealing-a-district-court-order) if you are
not happy with the decision of the judge. If you wish to appeal the decision,
you must file your appeal documents within the relevant timelines for each
court. For instance, if you want to appeal a District Court decision or order,
you must file your appeal documents within 14 days of the court hearing. In
some cases, you can apply to the Circuit Court for an extension of time to
appeal. You should seek legal advice regarding your appeal.

##  Further information

You can find more information on maintenance on the [ Courts Service website
](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/maintenance) and on the following
pages:

  * [ Maintenance orders and agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/)
  * [ Maintenance and social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/)
  * [ Maintenance payments and tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/)

###  Treoir

28 North Great Georges Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (01) 670 0120

**Homepage:** [ http://www.treoir.ie ](http://www.treoir.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.treoir.ie/contact-contact.php
](http://www.treoir.ie/contact-contact.php)

**Email:** [ info@treoir.ie ](mailto:info@treoir.ie)

###  One Family

8 Coke Lane  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 662 9212

**Locall:** 0818 66 22 12

**Homepage:** [ https://onefamily.ie/ ](https://onefamily.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@onefamily.ie ](mailto:info@onefamily.ie)

_**Page edited:** 17 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-
parents/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Maintenance%20and%20lone%20parents&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-
parents/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-
parents/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Maintenance%20and%20lone%20parents&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-
parents/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Maintenance payments and tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/)

The taxation of maintenance payments to a former partner depends on the type
of maintenance payment.

1133.9832

  * [ _Maintenance orders and agreements_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/)

What is maintenance and who has to pay it? If you can't reach an agreement,
how to apply for a maintenance order.

1114.4464

  * [ _Maintenance and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/)

If you have income from maintenance payments, this may be assessed in the
means test for social welfare payments. However, maintenance payments for
children are not assessed.

1083.926

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

