**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Problems in marriages and other relationships
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/) > Changing your name

#  Changing your name

  * How do I change my name? 
  * Changing your name after marriage 
  * Changing your name after separation or divorce 
  * How to change your name by Deed Poll 
  * Enrolling the deed 
  * Cost of changing your name by Deed Poll 
  * Changing a child's name by Deed Poll 
  * Further information 

##  How do I change my name?

Irish law does not set out how to change your name. This means you can change
the name you commonly use by simply using a new name.

However, you might have difficulty proving your new name to public and private
bodies (for example, your workplace, school, Revenue or the Passport Service)
without an official document referring to the change.

###  Getting proof of a name change

If you want written proof that you have changed your name, you can sign a
_Deed Poll._ A Deed Poll is a legal document saying you will take a particular
course of action from the date you sign it. This means from the date you sign
the Deed Poll, you can legally declare you:

  * Are no longer using your old name 
  * Will always use your new name 
  * Want to be called by your new name 

You do not need to sign a Deed Poll if you are changing your name after
marriage – see below.

##  Changing your name after marriage

You do not have to change your name when you get married. However, you may
want to change your name for traditional, cultural or practical reasons.

If you change your name when you marry, you do not need to sign a Deed Poll.
Most organisations will accept your marriage certificate as proof of your name
change.

You earn your name by 'use and repute'. This means for most purposes, if you
want to be known by your married name, then you just use this name and ask
people to call you by it.

##  Changing your name after separation or divorce

You can change back to your pre-marriage name after separation or divorce. You
will need to contact organisations to update your personal details, for
example, your bank, your employer, the Motor Tax Office, and your healthcare
provider.

Every organisation has different requirements so check what is needed to
complete the process. You usually need a valid form of identification and
certified evidence of your previous name. You may need to show a certified
copy of your [ separation agreement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/separation-agreement/) or [ divorce decree
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) .

###  Public Services Card (PSC)

To change your name on your [ Public Services Card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/public-services-card/) back to your pre-marriage name, submit either:

  * Divorce, dissolution or legal separation agreement documents 
  * Correspondence from a solicitor showing that a separation, divorce or dissolution has been initiated 

###  Passport

To change your name on your passport back to your pre-marriage name (or pre-
civil partnership name), you need to apply for a new passport. You can apply
using [ Passport Online ](https://www.dfa.ie/passportonline/) .

You must submit:

  * Your previous passport 
  * Your birth certificate 
  * A judicial separation court order, separation agreement, or divorce decree. This must be certified by a solicitor or by the court 
  * Your original marriage or civil partnership certificate 

Otherwise, you must show ‘proof of usage’. To do this, submit 2 official
documents showing you have been using your pre-marriage name for 2 years. The
Passport Service does not accept deed polls to change the name on your Irish
passport.

See more [ information about changing the name on your passport
](https://www.dfa.ie/passports/documentary-
requirements/anadult/renewal/changeinformation/#d.en.357827) , and the
documents you need, on the Department of Foreign Affairs website.

##  How to change your name by Deed Poll

You can get a solicitor to carry out (execute) the Deed Poll for you, or you
can do it yourself.

###  Step 1

Download a [ template of an adult Deed Poll
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/447f7a3b-0ed5-4326-97d9-e52159cced4f/Template%20of%20Adult%20Deed%20Poll.doc/doc/1)
from the Courts Service website. If you want to change the name of a child by
deed poll, contact [ deedpollquery@courts.ie ](mailto:deedpollquery@courts.ie)
to request the necessary documentation (see Changing a child’s name by Deed
Poll below).

The Deed Poll must be printed on deed paper (which is available from legal
stationers), or any high-quality paper. Deed paper is recommended so the
document lasts longer and in case there are any doubts about its authenticity.

In this form, you declare that you have given up your old name and adopted a
new name for all purposes.

###  Step 2

You [ sign the Deed Poll
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/447f7a3b-0ed5-4326-97d9-e52159cced4f/Template%20of%20Adult%20Deed%20Poll.doc/doc/1)
in your old name and your new name. You must sign it in the presence of a
witness. Your old name must match your birth certificate. Make sure you
include your middle name.

###  Step 3

The witness must be at least 18 years of age. They must sign the Deed Poll as
your witness.

They must also swear an Affidavit of Attesting Witness in the presence of a
solicitor or Commissioner for Oaths, stating they witnessed you signing of the
Deed Poll. Download a [ template of an Affidavit of Attesting Witness
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/c64f0689-39b3-44f0-b05f-1b6798686e96/Affidavit%20of%20Attesting%20Witness%20for%20Adult%20Deed%20Poll.doc/doc/1)
from the Courts Service website.

There is a small fee for swearing the affidavit before a solicitor or
Commissioner for Oaths.

###  Step 4

You can then sign a [ Request to Enrol form (doc)
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/4f922e53-24d3-4c6a-b41e-caff8f308a6f/Application%20to%20Enrol%20a%20Deed%20Poll.doc/doc/1)
, giving consent to the Courts Service to publish your name change on their
register. See ‘Enrolling the deed’ below. However, there is no requirement to
enrol it.

###  Change of Name licence for non-EEA nationals

If you are a non-EEA national aged 18 or over, and you want to change your
name by Deed Poll, you must first get a ‘ [ Change of Name licence
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-
ireland/change-of-name-licence/) ’ from Immigration Service Delivery (ISD) –
see ‘Contact details’ below. This rule is set out under [ Section 9 of the
Aliens Act 1935
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1935/en/act/pub/0014/index.html) .

To get an application form for a Change of Name licence, write to the [ Change
of Name section ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/change-of-name-licence/#submit-application) in ISD.
Once you have been granted a change of name licence you must apply to the Deed
Poll Office to legally change your name. Include the original Change of Name
licence with your Deed Poll documents. If your application is successful there
is a €13 fee for your Change of Name licence. Your Change of Name licence will
be sent to you by registered post.

British citizens and children under 18 do not need a Change of Name licence to
change their name by Deed Poll.

##  Enrolling the deed

Some organisations will only accept a Deed Poll which has been ‘enrolled’ in
the [ Central Office of the High Court
](https://www.courts.ie/content/central-office-high-court) (however, there is
no requirement to enrol it).

To enrol the deed in the Central Office of the High Court, you will need:

  * To have completed the Change your Name by Deed Poll form correctly 
  * Your Affidavit of Attesting Witness 
  * A certified copy of your [ birth certificate ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-certificate/)
  * Evidence of your previous name (for example, a birth certificate, marriage certificate, previous name change by Deed Poll, certificate of naturalisation) 
  * A 'change of name licence' if you are a non-EEA national (British citizens do not have to get a change of name licence) 
  * A certified copy of photographic identification (such as a passport or driver's licence) 

You must also complete a form known as a Request to enrol the a Deed Poll in
the Central Office of the High Court, acknowledging your change of name will
be available for public inspection and published on the Courts Service
website. [ Download an application form to enrol a Deed Poll
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/4f922e53-24d3-4c6a-b41e-caff8f308a6f/Application%20to%20Enrol%20a%20Deed%20Poll.doc/doc/1)
from Courts.ie.

Post your completed application with all supporting documentation to: Deed
Poll Section, Central Office of the High Court, The Four Courts, Inns Quay,
Dublin 7. Alternatively, you can enrol your Deed Poll in person by [ booking
an appointment in the Central Office ](https://www.courts.ie/appointments) .

You must pay stamp duty of €60 on the Deed Poll (you can pay at [ your local
Court Service office ](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us) ). Use the
Courts Service [ check list
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/18a21ee0-19ba-4395-aa12-0e7b54218f29/Deed%20Poll%20Checklist%202022.docx/docx/1)
to make sure you have all the documents you need.

Find [ more information about changing your name by deed poll
](https://www.courts.ie/deed-poll) on the Courts Service website.

##  Cost of changing your name by Deed Poll

There is a fee to have the Affidavit of Attesting Witness sworn before a [
Commissioner for Oaths ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/) or a practising [ solicitor
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) . There
is no fixed rate for legal fees, so ask your solicitor for information on
their costs before you hire them.

If you are non-EEA national, you will need a Change of Name licence to change
your name by Deed Poll (see above). If your application is successful there is
a €13 fee for your Change of Name licence.

If you enrol the Deed Poll in the Central Office of the High Court, you must
pay stamp duty of €60 on the document. You can do this at the [ Dublin Courts
stamping office ](https://www.courts.ie/content/dublin-courts-stamping-office)
or [ your local Courts Service branch ](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)
.

##  Changing a child's name by Deed Poll

You can change the surname of a child in the [ Register of Births
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-
baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/) , but only in certain
circumstances.

You can also change the surname of a minor (under 18) by Deed Poll or common
usage.

**Children aged 14 to** **17**

Children aged between 14 and 17 years can execute (carry out) the deed poll
themselves, but they need the consent of both parents.

**Children under 14**

If a child is under 14, one of the child's parents must execute the Deed Poll
with the consent of the other parent. Consent of both parents is needed.

If the second parent does not consent to the Deed Poll, then the first parent
must ask the District Court to make an order removing the need for the second
parent’s consent for Deed Poll.

**Forms and fees**

Currently, the form to make an application for a change of name for a minor
(under 18) is not available on the Courts Service website. If you want to
change the name of a child by deed poll, contact [ deedpollquery@courts.ie
](mailto:deedpollquery@courts.ie) to request the necessary documentation. You
will also need to confirm if both parents or legal guardians of the child
consent to the application.

There is a €60 stamp duty fee on the Change of Name by Deed Poll and a €20
stamp duty fee on the Supplemental Affidavit. This means that changing a
child’s name by Deed Poll has an €80 stamp duty fee in total.

##  Further information

###  Deed Poll Section

Central Office of the High Court  
Four Courts  
Ground Floor (East Wing)  
Inns Quay  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Tuesdays and Thursdays 10.00am to 12.30pm by appointment
only

**Tel:** (01) 888 6000

**Fax:** (01) 888 6125

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/appointments
](https://www.courts.ie/appointments)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/deed-poll ](https://www.courts.ie/deed-
poll)

###  Change of Name Licence Section

Department of Justice

Immigration Service Delivery  
3rd Floor  
13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ https://www.irishimmigration.ie/
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/)

**Email:** [ inischangeofname@justice.ie ](mailto:inischangeofname@justice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 28 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/changing-
your-name/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Changing%20your%20name&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/changing-
your-name/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/changing-your-
name/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Changing%20your%20name&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/changing-
your-name/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-in-ireland/)

Outlines the services and online tools available to get recognition for your
foreign qualification in Ireland. Also explains how the National Framework of
Qualifications can help you compare and contrast different qualifications.

1604.9955

  * [ _How to renew your driving licence_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/renewing-a-full-driving-licence/)

When your driving licence expires you must renew it if you still want to
drive.

1334.0786

  * [ _How to review your tax for PAYE taxpayers_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-review-your-paye-tax/)

How to check if you have paid the right amount of tax and what to do if you
have paid too much or too little.

1263.8718

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

