**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Children's rights and policy ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/) > National policy on children and
young people

#  National policy on children and young people

  * Introduction 
  * National Policy Framework forChildren and Young People 
  * National Strategy for Research andData on Children’s Lives 
  * Strategy on Children and YoungPeople's Participation in Decision-making 
  * National Youth Strategy 
  * Children and Young People’sServices Committees 
  * UN Convention on the Rights of theChild 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The National Policy Framework for Children and Young People covers policy
issues such as:

  * Early childhood care and education 
  * Youth justice 
  * Child welfare and protection 
  * Children and young people's participation in decision-making 
  * Research on children and young people 
  * Youth work 

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth is
responsible for the national policy for children and young people.

##  National Policy Framework forChildren and Young People

The most recent national policy for children and young people was called [
‘Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures 2014-2020 (pdf)’
](https://assets.gov.ie/23796/961bbf5d975f4c88adc01a6fc5b4a7c4.pdf) . It
outlined a shared set of goals for children and young people from birth to 24
years, including to:

  * Be active and healthy, with positive physical and mental wellbeing 
  * Achieve their full potential in all areas of learning and development 
  * Be safe and protected from harm 
  * Have economic security and opportunity 
  * Be connected, respected and contributing to their world 

All Government departments, agencies, statutory services and the voluntary and
community sectors aimed to work towards these goals.

‘Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures’ was the first national policy framework
for children and young people in Ireland.

Due to COVID-19, a new national policy to succeed ‘Better Outcomes, Brighter
Futures’ has been delayed until 2022.

##  National Strategy for Research andData on Children’s Lives

The [ National Strategy for Research and Data on Children’s Lives 2011–2016
(pdf)
](https://www.cypsc.ie/_fileupload/Documents/Resources/National%20Strategy%20for%20Research%20and%20Data%20on%20Childrens%20Lives%202011%20-%202016.pdf)
set out a plan for research and data on children’s lives in Ireland over the
period 2011–2016 and after that.

The strategy recognised the importance of good information in helping us
understand how children and young people are developing, as well as how
policies and services impact on their lives.

##  Strategy on Children and YoungPeople's Participation in Decision-making

The [ National Strategy on Children and Young People's Participation in
Decision-making (2015–2020) (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/24462/48a6f98a921446ad85829585389e57de.pdf) was
developed as part of the National Policy Framework for Children and Young
People.

The strategy identified actionable objectives, including:

  * Children and young people will have a voice in decisions made in their local communities 
  * Children and young people will have a voice in decision-making in early education, schools and the wider formal and non-formal education systems 
  * Children and young people will have a voice in decisions that affect their health and well-being, including on the health and social services delivered to them 
  * Children and young people will have a voice in the Courts and legal system 
  * Promoting effective leadership to champion and promote participation of children and young people 
  * Development of education and training for professionals working with and on behalf of children and young people 
  * Mainstreaming the participation of children and young people in the development of policy, legislation and research 

##  National Youth Strategy

The [ National Youth Strategy 2015–2020 (pdf) ](https://www.youth.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/20151008NatYouthStrat2015to2020.pdf) builds on the
National Policy Framework ‘Better Outcomes, Brighter Futures’.

The strategy sets out the Government’s aims and objectives for young people
aged 10 to 24 years, so that they can achieve the goals and outcomes set out
in the policy framework (see above).

##  Children and Young People’sServices Committees

Children and Young People’s Services Committees (CYPSCs) are responsible for
improving the lives of children and families at local and community level,
through integrated planning, working and service delivery.

All major organisations and agencies working locally on behalf of children and
young people are represented on CYPSCs.

The CYPSCs make sure that professionals and agencies work together, so that
children and families get better and more accessible services. Find [ more
information about CYPSCs ](http://www.cypsc.ie/) on their website.

##  UN Convention on the Rights of theChild

The United Nation’s Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) is a major
international human rights treaty that sets out the specific rights of
children. The UNCRC was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1989
and Ireland ratified it in 1992.

The [ UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/201322/9a51b8fd-1aec-49b2-a1f8-23f321c48fd4.pdf)
covers many issues, such as:

  * Health 
  * Housing 
  * Social security 
  * Education 
  * Leisure and play 
  * Child protection and welfare 
  * Criminal justice 
  * International protection 
  * Access to information 
  * Participation in decision-making 

Ireland submits regular reports to the UN Committee about the implementation
of rights under the Convention. Ireland also appears before the UN Committee
on the Rights of the Child for an oral examination.

Ireland’s next report under the Convention is due in February 2022, and the
hearing is scheduled for September 2022.

##  Further information

You can get [ more information about the National policy for children and
young people in Ireland ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy/e9b63e-children-and-
youth/) from the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and
Youth.

_**Page edited:** 8 November 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/national-policy-on-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=National%20policy%20on%20children%20and%20young%20people&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/national-policy-on-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/national-policy-on-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=National%20policy%20on%20children%20and%20young%20people&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/national-policy-on-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

2035.3287

  * [ _Vaccinations for children and young people_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/)

Vaccination and immunisation services for children are free of charge.

1770.6847

  * [ _Children and rights in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/children-and-rights-in-ireland/)

This document describes a child's rights in areas such as education,
employment, travel, recreation, health and relationships.

1254.0239

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

