**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > Separation, divorce and dissolution

#  Separation, divorce and dissolution

  * [ How pensions are assessed during a separation, divorce and dissolution ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)

When you end a relationship by judicial separation, divorce or dissolution,
the court can decide to share your pension with your former partner and (or)
any dependent children. This is called a pension adjustment order.

  * [ Family and shared homes ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-home/)

What is the difference between a family home and a shared home? Can my partner
sell our home if we break up?

  * [ Legal options following marital breakdown ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/legal-options-following-marital-breakdown/)

An introduction to the legal options following marital breakdown.

  * [ Family mediation for separating couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/)

Family mediation can help separating couples co-operate with each other to
work out mutually acceptable arrangements. Find out more about the mediation
process, how it works and how to access it.

  * [ Separation agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/)

Married couples and civil partners that agree to live separately may enter
into a separation agreement. Find out what this means and why this is legally
binding.

  * [ Judicial separation ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/judicial-separation/)

Find out what a judicial separation means, what the grounds are for applying
for judicial application, and what the process is.

  * [ Getting a divorce in Ireland ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/)

A divorce decree allows both parties to a marriage to remarry. However,
special conditions must be met before a court can grant a divorce.

  * [ Dissolution decree to end a civil partnership ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/)

A dissolution decree formally ends a civil partnership. Certain conditions
must be met before a court can grant a dissolution.

  * [ Factors considered by a court in a separation/divorce/dissolution ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/factors-in-separation-divorce/)

What are the factors considered by a court in making ancillary orders in an
application for a decree of judicial separation, divorce or dissolution?

  * [ Maintenance orders and agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/)

What is maintenance and who has to pay it? If you can't reach an agreement,
how to apply for a maintenance order.

  * [ Succession rights following a separation, divorce or dissolution ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/succession/)

Your succession rights relate to your inheritance, and these rights can change
following a separation or divorce.

  * [ Separation and divorce: children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-and-divorce-children/)

Information on the implications for guardianship, custody and access to
children following separation and divorce.

  * [ Presumption of paternity ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/presumption-of-paternity/)

What is presumption of paternity? Find out why it might be necessary to prove
paternity, and how to do it.

  * [ Maintenance payments and tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/)

The taxation of maintenance payments to a former partner depends on the type
of maintenance payment.

**This document is in:** [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

  * [ Separation, divorce and income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-reliefs/)

A change in your personal circumstances following separation or divorce may
have implications for how you are taxed. This page explains how income and
maintenance is taxed after separation or divorce.

**This document is in:** [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

  * [ Capital taxes following separation, divorce or dissolution ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-divorce/)

How capital taxes apply in the case of separation, divorce or dissolution,
including capital gains tax, capital acquisitions tax and stamp duty.

**This document is in:** [ Capital taxes ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/)

  * [ Nullity of marriage ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/nullity-of-marriage/)

Nullity of marriage in Irish law means that a court has declared that your
supposed marriage is null and void. Find out more.

**This document is in:** [ Problems in marriages and other relationships
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/)

###  Most Read in "Separation, divorce and dissolution"

  1. [ Getting a divorce in Ireland ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/)
  2. [ Maintenance orders and agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/)
  3. [ Separation agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/)
  4. [ Family and shared homes ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-home/)
  5. [ Family mediation for separating couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/)

