**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Getting married ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/) > Broken engagements

#  Broken engagements

  * Introduction 
  * Gifts between an engaged couple 
  * Gifts from a third party (such as a family member or friend) 
  * Wedding preparation expenses 
  * Property of engaged couples 
  * Taking legal action 
  * Legal advice 
  * Contact information 

##  Introduction

Most couples get engaged before they get married.

If the engagement is broken (called off) and there is a dispute between the
couple over property or finances, the [ Family Law Act 1981
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1981/en/act/pub/0022/index.html) allows them
to take legal action against each other. The Act also allows an involved third
party (such as a family member) to take legal action.

Before the Family Law Act 1981 came into effect, an engagement was considered
a legally binding contract. This meant that, if the engagement was broken
without a lawful reason, the person responsible for breaking off the
engagement (breaking the contract) could be sued for damages for breach of
promise. Since the 1981 Act, you cannot take legal action for breach of
promise following a broken engagement.

##  Gifts between an engaged couple

If an engaged couple exchanges gifts, including an engagement ring, there's a
presumption that these gifts will be returned if one of them asks for them
back in the event of the engagement ending.

However, if the person that gives the gift dies, it is presumed any gifts were
given without any conditions. In this case, the surviving fiancé(e) can keep
the gifts.

You can contest either of these presumptions in court if there is evidence to
the contrary.

You may be able to challenge either of these presumptions in court by
presenting evidence that contradicts them.

##  Gifts from a third party (such as a family member or friend)

If someone gives an engaged couple (or one of the couple) a wedding gift, it
is presumed that the couple are joint owners of the gift. This can be
challenged in court if there is evidence to the contrary.

It is also presumed that the gift will be returned (if requested), if the
engagement ends and the marriage does not take place for any reason. This
includes the death of one of the engaged couple.

If a third party gives a substantial benefit (not a wedding gift) to one of
the couple as a result of the engagement, the third party can take legal
action if the engagement ends. For example, if a relative carries out or pays
for substantial work to improve a property which the couple had planned to use
as their family home, the relative can apply to the courts for compensation.

##  Wedding preparation expenses

If an engagement ends, and one person has spent a lot of money preparing for
the wedding (without getting any benefit from it), that person can ask the
courts for compensation from their former fiancé(e).

Examples of expenses might include:

  * Booking the wedding reception 
  * Booking the honeymoon 
  * Hiring a photographer or videographer 

If somebody else (for example, a family member or friend) has spent a lot of
money preparing for the wedding on behalf of one of the couple (and has not
benefited), they may also apply to the courts for compensation.

##  Property of engaged couples

When a couple (whose engagement has ended) disagrees about how any property is
divided, it is treated in the same way as disputes between a married couple
who are separating or divorcing.

This only applies to property in which either or both of them had a beneficial
interest while they were engaged. It does not apply to property acquired after
the engagement ended.

##  Taking legal action

If your engagement has ended and you want to take legal action, you must do it
within 3 years.

Such cases are usually heard in the [ Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-
system/circuit-court/) . However, if very valuable property is involved, you
may ask that it be heard in the [ High Court. ](/en/justice/courts-
system/high-court/)

If you want to take legal action regarding significant gifts from a third
party or expenses related to wedding preparations, you can go to the [
District Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/) if the amount of compensation is less than €15,000.

##  Legal advice

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres)
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.flac.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CMoira.Fraser%40ciboard.ie%7C6003ac21371841ee4d9008dc57cbaf6e%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638481779534958139%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=IRVd8UpJVDK4GtmUExSMn71M80oy0Kxvgk7umNpZ6vc%3D&reserved=0)
is an independent, voluntary organisation. A limited number of [ FLAC phone
clinic appointments ](https://www.flac.ie/help/advice/) are offered in
conjunction with [ Citizen Information Services
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcentres.citizensinformation.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CMoira.Fraser%40ciboard.ie%7C6003ac21371841ee4d9008dc57cbaf6e%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638481779534973218%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=PWAIHWpLyGDAn04tjg40HZExuQuckU6HVSOtHycEwY0%3D&reserved=0)
around the country. These appointments are with a volunteer lawyer and are
confidential and free of charge. Contact your nearest [ Citizens Information
Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC
phone clinic appointments in your area. FLAC’s [ Information and Referral Line
](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline/) for basic legal information is open
Monday to Friday from 9.30am-1pm. Read more about FLAC and its services.

To enquire whether you are [ eligible for legal aid
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-
legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) , [ contact your nearest law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) . Legal
aid is generally not free and most recipients must pay a contribution towards
costs. You can download [ an application form for Legal Services (pdf)
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Our-Services/Legal-Aid-Services/Application-
For-Legal-Services-Form-October-2014.pdf) or you can [ apply for civil legal
aid or advice online ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-
services/apply-for-legal-aid-online/) . If you cannot afford to pay the
contribution, you can [ apply to the Legal Aid Board to have it waived
](https://legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-services/apply-for-a-
waiver-of-contribution/) .

Alternatively, you can discuss your situation with a solicitor who will
provide you with advice. [ Contact information for solicitors throughout
Ireland ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/) is available from the
Law Society.

##  Contact information

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

The Legal Aid service operates out of [ law centres
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) staffed
by qualified solicitors.

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 31 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/broken-
engagments/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Broken%20engagements&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/broken-
engagments/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/getting-married/broken-
engagments/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Broken%20engagements&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/getting-married/broken-
engagments/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Finding somewhere to live when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/finding-somewhere-to-live-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to find accommodation when you return to
Ireland.

619.9609

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

502.04962

  * [ _Rights of cohabiting couples (couples living together)_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/)

Couples living together have some rights and obligations, but they do not have
the same rights and obligations as married couples or civil partnerships

402.702

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

