**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Services and supports for children ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/) > Mental health
services for children and young people in Ireland

#  Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Your GP 
  * Primary care services 
  * Specialist services 
  * Private mental health care services 
  * Non-profit organisations 
  * Get urgent help 

##  Introduction

It can be an overwhelming experience for a parent when your child is
experiencing difficulties with their mental health. Sometimes, mental health
issues can be eased by getting support from family or friends. Other times,
mental health issues can be more complex and difficult to deal with.

You can access a range of free supports and resources to help you manage
‘mild’ mental health challenges and protect you child's mental health and
wellbeing. These include websites like [ spunout.ie
](https://spunout.ie/category/mental-health) and [ yourmentalhealth.ie
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/) . You can also contact helplines and
advocacy services that are funded and supported by the HSE. For example, [
50808 ](https://spunout.ie/news/news-2/text-message-support-service-ctl) , [
Childline ](https://www.childline.ie/) , and [ Samaritans
](https://www.samaritans.org/?currency=EUR&nation=ireland) .

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has
published a directory of the different [ services and supports available for
parents, children and young people ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e0bdb-
keeping-you-and-your-child-safe/) . You can also find information on [
helplines for parents and parenting courses
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9116d-helplines-parenting-courses-and-
advice/) .

If you need more support, there are mental health services specifically for
children. The service or organisation you go to depends on what your child is
going through, and whether it is considered 'mild', or more 'severe'. Even
when a mental health difficulty is categorised as ‘mild’, that does not mean
it is not serious or important. All mental health difficulties can be
distressing and have a significant impact.

Knowing what mental health services there are and how to access them isn’t
always easy. Here we describe the main services and how they can help.

  * Your family doctor 
  * Primary care services 
  * Specialist services 
  * Private mental health care services 
  * Non-profit organisations 

##  Your GP

If your child is experiencing mental health difficulties, contact your GP.

You can visit your GP along with your child or young person. The [ HSE has a
list of questions ](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/services-
support/questions-to-ask/) you, or your child, might find useful when you are
talking to the GP or other healthcare professional.

Explain what you’re worried about and any changes, however big or small, you
have noticed in the last weeks or months. Your GP is likely to ask lots of
questions. It is important to tell the GP everything you are concerned about
so they can either advise what to do next, or give you a referral for the
right services, if appropriate.

Your GP may want to meet or talk with your young person alone for some time.
That’s normal.

Your GP will identify the right support or service for your child, based on:

  * Their age 
  * The type of symptoms they are experiencing 
  * The severity of their symptoms 
  * Their level of risk 

##  Primary care services

The next level of supports and services are sometimes described as primary
care services. These are designed for people who are going through ‘mild to
moderate’ mental health difficulties. The types of support offered at this
level tend to be brief and last for a specified length of time.

  * [ **Jigsaw** ](https://jigsaw.ie/) offers free one-to-one mental health support for young people aged 12-25 with mild to moderate mental health concerns. Referrals for young people under 18 are accepted from parents and health care professionals. You can email or phone [ your local Jigsaw service ](https://jigsaw.ie/services-in-your-area/) to ask for an appointment. 
  * **HSE Primary Care Psychology services** are based in local primary care centres all over Ireland. They provide a broad range of free services to children aged 0 - 17 years of age. Each primary care centre usually has a team of occupational therapists, psychologists, nurses and social workers. Services include individual therapy, group-based therapeutic work for children, adolescents and parents, and various types of assessments. Referrals are accepted from healthcare professionals. 
  * [ **Family Resource Centres** ](https://www.familyresource.ie/family-resource-centres-regions.php) are run by the Child and Family Agency Tusla around the country. They deliver free community-based supports to children and parents, and some services have access to counselling. 

##  Specialist services

The next level of supports and services are designed for people who are
experiencing moderate to severe mental health issues. The services at this
level are sometimes described as specialist services. They are usually led by
psychiatrists, and most of the people who are accessing supports at this level
will have a clinical mental health diagnosis. To access these supports and
services your child will need a referral from your GP or healthcare
professional.

###  CAMHS

The main specialist mental health support for young people under the age of 18
is child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS). CAMHS is designed for
young people with moderate to severe mental health difficulties.

CAMHS prioritises referrals based on risk, which means people who are
considered at highest risk will be seen sooner, and those categorised as lower
risk will wait longer to be seen. CAHMS assesses and treats conditions
including:

  * Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
  * Moderate to severe depression 
  * Anxiety 
  * Eating disorders 
  * Self-harm 

CAMHS have 3 levels of referrals:

  1. **Emergency referral** is when there is a significant risk to the young person’s safety, such as suicide attempt, significant self-harm or a severe eating disorder. These referrals will be prioritised and seen quickly. 
  2. **Urgent referral** is where there are high concerns for the young person but it is not a crisis or emergency. 
  3. Referrals are categorised as **routine** when there is no immediate risk. 

Specialist services are also for people who are experiencing severe and
complex mental health issues and need intensive support. This can involve a
stay in a hospital or a similar supported living setting where a team of
mental health professionals can monitor symptoms and give specialist support
and treatments.

[ Inpatient treatment ](https://spunout.ie/mental-health/getting-
help/inpatient-treatment) can be helpful if your child's symptoms are so
severe that they are making it difficult for them to function, if their safety
is at risk, or if they also need some physical health treatment because of
their mental health issues.

##  Private mental health care services

Mental health professionals in private practice all over Ireland provide
therapy sessions for young people under 18. You should check what experience
they have with working with young people, the type of support they offer, and
the cost per session before making an appointment. You do not need a referral
from your GP, you can just make appointments directly.

Not all therapists are trained in the same way or have the same
qualifications. Spunout has information to help you [ understand the
difference between counsellors and psychotherapists
](https://spunout.ie/mental-health/getting-help/private-counselling-
psychotherapy) and the types of therapy available.

##  Non-profit organisations

Some charities and organisations offer services you might find useful when
looking for support for your young person. Some of these organisations receive
HSE funding.

  * [ Bodywhys (Eating Disorders Association of Ireland) ](https://www.bodywhys.ie/)
  * [ Childline ](https://www.childline.ie/)
  * [ Teenline ](https://www.ispcc.ie/teenline/)
  * [ Barnardos ](https://www.barnardos.ie/)
  * [ Pieta House ](https://www.pieta.ie/how-we-can-help/helpline/)

##  Get urgent help

**Call 999 or 112 if you or someone you know is about to harm themselves or
someone else.**

_**Page edited:** 24 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-
services-children-young-people/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Mental%20health%20services%20for%20children%20and%20young%20people%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-
services-children-young-people/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-
children-young-people/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Mental%20health%20services%20for%20children%20and%20young%20people%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-
services-children-young-people/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Vaccinations for children and young people_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/)

Vaccination and immunisation services for children are free of charge.

2457.182

  * [ _National policy on children and young people_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/national-policy-on-children/)

This document gives information on national policy on children and young
people in Ireland and their participation in decision-making.

2206.2954

  * [ _Health and medical services for children_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/child-health-services/)

The general entitlement of children to health services in Ireland and the
specific services available.

2000.8489

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

