**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Separation, divorce and dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/) > Family mediation for
separating couples

#  Family mediation for separating couples

  * What is mediation? 
  * Who is mediation for? 
  * How can mediation help? 
  * How does mediation work? 
  * What is the outcome of mediation? 
  * Parenting, children and mediation 
  * Cost 
  * Further information 

##  What is mediation?

Mediation is a service to help couples in Ireland who have decided to [
separate ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/judicial-
separation/) or [ divorce ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/divorce-decrees/) , or who have already separated, to come to
agreement in relation to decisions about the children, the family home,
finances and the future.

In mediation, a trained mediator helps you to negotiate your own terms of
agreement in a safe space, while addressing the needs and interests of all
involved. Mediation allows you and your ex-partner to make your own decisions,
rather than going to court and having a judge make them for you. Mediation can
be an effective, cheaper and quicker alternative to court.

**Mediation is not marriage counselling or a legal advice service.**

##  Who is mediation for?

Mediation is for married and non-married couples. It also assists same-sex
couples who have decided to separate, and parents who have never lived
together but have a child or children to take care of. In certain
circumstances, it can also assist in disputes within families.

##  How can mediation help?

Relationship breakdown can be very emotional and stressful – making it
particularly difficult to agree decisions in relation to living arrangements,
finances and childcare.

Mediation encourages a separating couple to co-operate with each other in
working out mutually acceptable arrangements on all or any of the following:

  * Parenting the children 
  * Education, schooling or childcare arrangements 
  * Family holidays and special occasions 
  * Financial support 
  * Family home and property, division of assets 
  * Other problems related to the separation 

The role of the mediator is to:

  * See a couple together and look at the issues to be discussed and agreed. 
  * Create a climate in which neither party dominates but in which both parties participate fully in good faith. 
  * Create and maintain an atmosphere of co-operation and responsibility. 
  * Help couples deal with difficult emotional issues that can prevent them reaching agreement. 
  * Help couples reach agreement that they both find acceptable. 

##  How does mediation work?

For mediation to work, both parties must confirm their willingness to attend.

Mediation is a process, which means there is a structure and formula in how it
is delivered. The issues discussed depend on the needs and wishes of the
separating couple.

With the help of a mediator, the couple systematically consider each issue,
explore their options and come to decisions. The parties are encouraged to get
expert advice such as legal or financial advice to ensure that the separating
couple can make informed decisions that they both find acceptable.

Discussions are confidential and the mediator does not take sides.

###  How long does it take?

Mediation usually takes between 3 and 6 sessions. Each session lasts
approximately one hour.

##  What is the outcome of mediation?

Most mediations end with a written document, sometimes referred to as a Note
of Mediated Agreement, that sets out all the details of the couple's
agreement.

The type of agreements that may be reached include:

  * **Comprehensive agreements** : which cover all issues resulting from the separation including finance, parenting, accommodation etc 
  * **Parenting agreements** : which address parenting issues and support good parenting models 
  * **Financial agreements** : which cover the finances and assets of the couple 
  * **Interim agreements** : where the parties make an agreement for a specific time frame 
  * **Partial agreements** : which addresses a particular issue or issues 

The mediated agreement is not a legal agreement, however, you can bring this
document to a solicitor to be drawn into a legal contract or [ deed of
separation ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-
agreement/) . You may also use it as the basis for a [ decree of divorce
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) .

For more details on what mediation is and how it works, see [ Mediation for
separating couples (pdf)
](https://www.themii.ie/ckeditor_uploads/files/mii_separating_couples.pdf)
published by the [ Mediators’ Institute of Ireland. ](https://www.themii.ie/)

##  Parenting, children and mediation

The mediator can ensure that the voice of the child is heard during the
mediation process, helping to minimise any damage to the children caught in
the middle of parental disputes.

Parenting plans may be reviewed in light of the changing needs of the children
as they progress through school or teenage years. This can be facilitated by
the mediator at a later stage and can be written into the mediated agreement.

##  Cost

###  Private family mediation

[ The Mediators’ Institute of Ireland (the MII) ](https://www.themii.ie/) is
the professional association for mediators in Ireland.

Private family mediation services are available throughout the country.
Private mediators charge in a variety of ways (daily rate/hourly rate/flat
rate). Contact the Mediators’ Institute of Ireland [ for a full list of
approved and accredited mediators in your area ](https://www.themii.ie/) or go
to [ mii.ie to find a mediator ](https://www.themii.ie/) .

###  The Family Mediation Service

The Family Mediation Service is a free service provided by the [ Legal Aid
Board ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) . For an
appointment, both parties must contact the service separately to make an
appointment. There can be waiting lists to access this service.

A call back service for its Family Mediation Service is now available to make
it easier to make first contact with the service. Fill in a [ request a call
back form ](https://familymediationcallback.board.ie/) with your name, phone
number and the area you live in, and the service will be in touch to arrange a
call back.

You can find a [ list of Family Mediation Service offices
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Contact-Us/Find-a-Mediation-Office/) , as
well as [ information on the Family Mediation Service
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Family_Mediation_Service)
on the Legal Aid Board's website. They also have a [ leaflet on the service
(pdf) ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Our-Services/Family-Mediation/Family-
Mediation-Service-Booklet.pdf) .

##  Further information

###  The Mediators' Institute of Ireland

Suite 112, The Capel Building  
Mary's Abbey  
Dublin 7  
D07 X544

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 609 9190

**Homepage:** [ https://www.themii.ie/ ](https://www.themii.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@themii.ie ](mailto:info@themii.ie)

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

_**Page edited:** 22 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Family%20mediation%20for%20separating%20couples&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Family%20mediation%20for%20separating%20couples&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet: How to calculate your Working Family Payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-how-to-calculate-your-family-income-supplement/)

This worksheet is to help you to work out the amount of Working Family Payment
you may get.

1695.7704

  * [ _Workplace mediation_ ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-mediation/)

Workplace mediation provides a simpler and faster way to resolve disputes,
conflicts and disagreements in the workplace.

1427.742

  * [ _Mediation and settlement of claims_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/mediation-and-settlement-of-claims/)

This document describes how claims are settled in civil cases.

1289.7423

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

