**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Miscarriage and stillbirth ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/) > Registering a stillbirth

#  Registering a stillbirth

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * How to register a stillbirth 
  * Cost 
  * Historical information 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

A stillbirth is the death or loss of a baby before or during delivery. The
baby must have had a gestational age of at least 24 weeks or weighed at least
500 grams (1lb 1.6oz).

Experiencing the loss of your baby is extremely difficult and a very emotional
time for you, your family and friends. The [ HSE provides information on
stillbirth ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/child-health/stillbirth/when-
stillbirth-happens.html) , including possible causes and what happens after
the diagnosis of a stillbirth. The Pregnancy and Infant Loss Ireland website
has [ information, advice and details of supports available for parents that
experience a stillbirth ](https://pregnancyandinfantloss.ie/) .

Stillbirth is different to miscarriage. A miscarriage can occur at any stage
of a pregnancy, up until 24 weeks. When a baby lives for only a few hours or
days after birth their death is referred to as a neonatal death.

In Ireland, all stillbirths can be registered but it is not mandatory. A
stillbirth is registered by signing the Stillbirths Register. A stillbirth may
be registered in any HSE [ Civil Registration Service
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-
registration-service.html) .

This document outlines the process for registering a stillbirth in Ireland.

##  Rules

To register the stillbirth, you will need a signed medical certificate
including:

  * The baby's weight and gestational age 
  * The name and address of where the stillbirth took place 

You can get the signed medical certificate from the doctor, midwife or medical
practitioner who attended the birth or examined the baby.

If a stillbirth is not registered within 12 months, the hospital, midwife or
medical practitioner who attended the birth may be asked to register it.

###  If the stillbirth happened before 1995

If you wish to register a stillbirth that happened before 1 January 1995, you
will need specific evidence that the stillbirth occurred. This evidence could
be a written statement from your hospital, nursing home, medical practitioner
or midwife, but the registrar may accept other forms of evidence.

Again, the stillbirth can only be registered if the baby weighed at least 500
grams (1lb 1.6oz) or had a gestational age of at least 24 weeks.

##  How to register a stillbirth

If you are the parent/s of a stillborn baby, you must register their
stillbirth by signing the Stillbirths Register at any [ Civil Registration
Service ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-
civil-registration-service.html) . You will need to show photographic ID and
written evidence that the stillbirth occurred.

When you sign the Stillbirths Register, the registrar will give you a
stillbirth certificate. If you would like an additional stillbirth certificate
at a later date, you can [ order a stillbirth certificate online
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/get-
certificates/get-an-irish-stillbirth-certificate-online.html) from the HSE.

If your baby was stillborn in hospital, the hospital staff will help you to
complete a Birth Notification Form (Form BNF/01). If the stillbirth happened
at home, the midwife or doctor will do this.

The Birth Notification Form is completed with the baby’s:

  * Time, date and place of stillbirth 
  * Gender 
  * Weight and gestational age 
  * Personal Public Service number (PPSN) – this will be allocated at registration 
  * Forename(s) and surname 

The form also includes:

  * The mother's forename(s) and surname 
  * The mother's birth surname 
  * Previously used surnames of the mother (if any) 
  * The mother's normal occupation 
  * The mother's normal address at the date of birth 
  * The mother's date of birth 
  * The mother's civil status 
  * The mother's Personal Public Service number (PPSN) 
  * The birth surname of the mother's mother (the baby’s maternal grandmother’s birth surname) 

Similar information may be entered for the father.

When the form has been completed, it will be sent to a [ Civil Registration
Office ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-
civil-registration-service.html) to tell the registrar of the stillbirth.

Then, you should attend a [ Civil Registration Service
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-
registration-service.html) in person and sign the Stillbirths Register.

You will need to bring photographic ID and written evidence of the stillbirth
(such as the signed medical certificate stating the weight and gestational
age) with you.

After you sign the Stillbirths Register, you will be given a stillbirth
certificate.  

##  Cost

A signed medical certificate, which you can get from the doctor, midwife or
medical practitioner who attended the birth or examined the baby, is free of
charge.

A stillbirth certificate is also free of charge. However, if you want to [
order a copy of the stillbirth certificate
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/get-
certificates/ordering-certificates.html) at a later date, this will cost €20.

##  Historical information

Before the [ Civil Registration Act 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2004/en/act/pub/0003/sec0028.html#sec28) came
into effect on 5 December 2005, a stillbirth could only be registered in the
Registrar's District in which it took place. A stillbirth can now be
registered in any district, regardless of where it took place.  

##  Further information

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

###  A Little Lifetime Foundation

18 Orion Business Campus,  
Rosemount Business Park,  
Ballycoolin,  
Blanchardstown,  
Dublin 15  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 882 9030

**Homepage:** [ http://www.alittlelifetime.ie/
](http://www.alittlelifetime.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@alittlelifetime.ie ](mailto:info@alittlelifetime.ie)

###  Féileacáin

37 North Street  
Skibbereen  
Co Cork  
Ireland

**Tel:** 028 51301

**Homepage:** [ https://feileacain.ie/ ](https://feileacain.ie/)

**Email:** [ admin@feileacain.ie ](mailto:admin@feileacain.ie)

_**Page edited:** 15 October 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering-
stillbirth/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Registering%20a%20stillbirth&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering-
stillbirth/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering-
stillbirth/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Registering%20a%20stillbirth&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering-
stillbirth/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Registering the birth of your baby_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/)

Find out how to register the birth of your baby in Ireland and how to get a
copy of a birth certificate.

1260.326

  * [ _Homeless and registering to vote_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/homeless-and-registering-to-voting/)

How to register to vote if you have no fixed address or you are homeless.

1151.8286

  * [ _Registering a political party in Ireland_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/running-for-office/registering-a-political-party/)

How to register a political party in Ireland.

1133.7191

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

