**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/) > Life insurance, pensions and cohabiting
couples in Ireland

#  Life insurance, pensions and cohabiting couples in Ireland

  * Life assurance and pensions 
  * Tax implications of cohabiting 
  * Check your insurance policies 
  * Further information 

##  Life assurance and pensions

A cohabiting couple is a couple that lives together in an intimate and
committed relationship, who are not married to each other and not in a civil
partnership. Cohabiting couples can be opposite-sex or same-sex.

Your life insurance or pension policy in Ireland may provide for a lump sum,
or pension to be paid to a specified person on your death or retirement. In
this case, you may be able to nominate your cohabiting partner as the
beneficiary.

However, many policies specify that only a spouse or civil partner may
benefit. Where a policy specifies that only a spouse or civil partner may
benefit, your cohabiting partner will not have any entitlements.

Likewise, you may be entitled to a supplement to your pension in respect of a
spouse/civil partner, but not in respect of a cohabitee (your partner).

If you are a 'qualified cohabitant' under the [ Redress scheme for cohabiting
couples ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-
for-cohabiting-couples/) , you may apply for provision out of your partner's
estate if they die, but you will still have to pay Inheritance Tax on anything
you receive as a result of that application.

Check with your insurer or the trustees of your pension, or your life
insurance provider, if you want to be sure about the conditions of your
particular policy. If you are not married or in a civil partnership, you
should see if your policy can be changed to allow your partner entitlements
that they would not otherwise have.

##  Tax implications of cohabiting

All benefits passing between married couples and civil partners are exempt
from [ Inheritance and Gift Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-
acquisitions-tax/) . However, cohabiting couples have no such entitlement.

[ Cohabiting couples are treated as strangers for Inheritance and Gift Tax
purposes ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-
rights-cohabiting-couples/) . The stranger threshold for Inheritance Tax is
currently €16,250. Inheritances in excess of €16,250 are subject to tax at
33%.

##  Check your insurance policies

A life insurance policy can provide money for dependants if you die. There are
different types of cover including single cover and joint cover. The CCPC has
detailed [ information about life insurance
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/life-insurance/) .

Life cover or life insurance is a way of ensuring any debts can also be paid
off by your partner if you die. It can cover items such as a mortgage, credit
cards, personal or car loans, and costs arising from your funeral.

If you are living with your partner but you are not married, whether or not
Inheritance Tax will be paid on any payout from the life cover policy in the
event of one of you dying will be decided by two things:

  * Who will receive the policy proceeds on death (the beneficiary)? 
  * Who paid the premiums on the policy? 

If the beneficiary did not pay the premiums, or if the beneficiary is not the
legal spouse or registered civil partner of the person who paid the premiums,
the policy proceeds are likely to be liable to Inheritance Tax.

**Examples of the potential financial impact of inheritance tax for cohabiting couples** John Brown takes out "Life Cover" of €100,000 on his own life and pays the premiums by direct debit from his own bank account. John dies and based on the terms of John’s will the €100,000 is paid to his cohabitant partner Mary Smith.  Assuming Mary inherited no other assets, the liability to tax is on the full benefit from the Life Cover policy.  |  Mary’s taxable inheritance is €100,000.  Threshold €16,250 exempt.  Balance €83,750 taxed at 33% = €27,637   
---|---  
John Brown and Mary Smith take out “Dual Life Cover" of €100,000. John and Mary are joint owners of the policy, and pay premiums out of their joint account. John dies and the €100,000 is paid to his cohabiting partner Mary Smith because she is the surviving policy owner.  Assuming Mary inherited no other assets, and Revenue agree that she has paid 50% of the premiums, Mary will be taxed on 50% of the benefit.  |  Mary’s taxable inheritance is €50,000.  Threshold €16,250 exempt.  Balance €33,750 taxed at 33% = €11,137.   
Mary Smith takes out a “Life Policy” with Life Cover of €100,000 on John Brown’s life. Mary is the policy owner with John as the life assured. Mary pays the premiums by direct debit from her own bank account. John dies and the €100,000 is paid to his partner Mary Smith as she is the legal owner of the policy.  |  Mary has no liability to Inheritance Tax as she is both the beneficiary and the person who paid the premiums.   
  
If you are not married or in a civil partnership, it's a good idea to have a
chat with a financial or tax expert. Make sure the life insurance or mortgage
protection you and your partner have is the right choice for your situation.
It's important to set it up in a way that avoids any tax issues for either of
you in case one of you passes away.

##  Further information

[ Insurance Ireland ](http://www.insuranceireland.eu/) provides consumer
information and [ a free Insurance Information Service (IIS)
](http://www.insuranceireland.eu/consumer-information/insurance-information-
service) for members of the public.

###  Insurance Ireland

Insurance Centre  
5 Harbourmaster Place  
IFSC  
Dublin 1  
DO1 E7E8  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 676 1820

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 676 1943

**Homepage:** [ http://www.insuranceireland.eu/
](http://www.insuranceireland.eu/)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.insuranceireland.eu/enquiry-form
](http://www.insuranceireland.eu/enquiry-form)

**Email:** [ info@insuranceireland.eu ](mailto:info@insuranceireland.eu)

###  Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman

3rd Floor  
Lincoln House  
Lincoln Place  
Dublin 2  
D02 VH29  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 567 7000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fspo.ie/ ](http://www.fspo.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@fspo.ie ](mailto:info@fspo.ie)

###  Pensions Authority

Verschoyle House  
28-30 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 613 1900

**Homepage:** [ https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@pensionsauthority.ie ](mailto:info@pensionsauthority.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/life-insurance-pensions-civil-
status/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Life%20insurance%2C%20pensions%20and%20cohabiting%20couples%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/life-insurance-pensions-civil-
status/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/life-insurance-pensions-civil-
status/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Life%20insurance%2C%20pensions%20and%20cohabiting%20couples%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/life-insurance-pensions-civil-
status/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Unclaimed life insurance policies_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/insurance/unclaimed-life-insurance-policies/)

Find out about what happens to a life insurance policy when it is not claimed
by the owner.

1782.9485

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

1274.5634

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and buying private health insurance_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-and-buying-private-health-insurance/)

Outlines things you should consider when buying private health insurance as a
returning Irish emigrant. Covers waiting periods, pre-existing conditions,
age-related loading and maternity related claims.

1184.5593

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

