**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Adoption, fostering and surrogacy ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/) > Kinship care

#  Kinship care

  * What is kinship care? 
  * Guardianship 
  * Social welfare 
  * Further information 

##  What is kinship care?

In some circumstances, grandparents, other relatives or a family friend may
take on the full-time care of children and young people, when parents are not
able to care for them. Reasons for this include parental drug or alcohol
misuse, imprisonment, abuse or neglect, domestic violence and parental health
issues or parental capacity. Kinship care can also arise from the death of a
parent. Many kinship care arrangements are informal unlike [ relative foster
care ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/) which
is a formal arrangement.

Depending on how your kinship family is formed there are different routes to
secure your legal relationship with and responsibility for the children and
young people in your care, to ensure that their rights can be exercised and
protected.

##  Guardianship

Guardianship is the legal responsibility of a person to perform duties
regarding a child's upbringing and welfare. It also includes the right to make
decisions about major areas of the child’s life.

For example, guardians have a duty to properly care for a child. They also
have rights that may include decisions on:

  * Consent to medical treatment 
  * What school the child attends 
  * Passport applications and taking the child out of the country 
  * The child's religious upbringing 

To apply for custody and/or guardianship, contact your local District Court
Office. When a birth parent is alive, a kinship carer must be caring for a
child for 12 consecutive months before they can become a legal guardian. [
Kinship Care Ireland ](https://www.kinshipcare.ie/) can provide further
information and support on applying for guardianship.

###  Temporary guardianship

A guardian may nominate another person to act as a guardian if they are unable
to exercise their guardianship rights due to serious illness or injury. The
nomination must be made in writing and can specify the rights and
responsibilities that the nominated person can exercise. The nominated person
must then [ apply to the court for guardianship rights
](https://services.courts.ie/Family-Law/arrangements-for-
children/guardianship) if and when necessary.

###  Testamentary guardianship

A guardian can appoint another guardian in their will to take on the
responsibility of their children after their death. The ‘testamentary
guardian’ can then apply to the court for custody of the child. If a
testamentary guardian is appointed and there is another surviving guardian,
both guardians will act jointly with each other and have the right to apply
for custody of the child.

##  Social welfare

You may get social welfare support if a child lives with you and you are
responsible for their care. For example, you may qualify to receive [ Child
Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) and/or [
Guardian's Payment ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-
orphan-payments/) .

[ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) is
a monthly payment to the parents or guardians of children under 16 years of
age. You can get Child Benefit for children aged 16 and 17, if they are in
full-time education or full-time training, or have a disability and cannot
support themselves. From 1 May 2024, Child Benefit will be extended to
children aged 18 who are in full-time education or who have a disability.

[ Guardian’s Payment ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-
orphan-payments/) is a weekly payment of €215 per week per child to support
meeting the caring needs of a child. You do not need to be a legal guardian to
apply for Guardian’s Payment. If you are a kinship carer who has been refused
Guardian’s Payment, contact Kinship Care Ireland for further information and
support.

[ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) and the [ Additional Needs Payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/additional-needs-payment/) are means-tested payments that you can
apply for while you are waiting for the processing of your Guardian’s Payment
application.

##  Further information

Contact [ Kinship Care Ireland ](https://www.kinshipcare.ie/) for more
information about additional support payments that you may qualify for and
advice on legal issues that can arise if you have a child in your care. If you
wish, Kinship Care Ireland can also arrange for you to meet other kinship
carers.

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) ](https://www.flac.ie/) is an independent,
voluntary organisation. A limited number of [ FLAC phone clinic appointments
](https://www.flac.ie/help/advice/) are offered in conjunction with [ Citizen
Information Services ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) around the
country. These appointments are with a volunteer lawyer and are confidential
and free of charge. Contact your nearest [ Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC phone
clinic appointments in your area. FLAC’s [ Information and Referral
](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline/) Line for basic legal information is open
Monday to Friday from 9.30am-1pm.

You can also contact [ your nearest law centre
](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/contact-us/find-a-law-centre/) for
information on Legal Aid. If you are eligible for [ legal aid and advice
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-
legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) from the Legal Aid Board, you generally will have
to pay a contribution towards the costs.

###  Kinship Care Ireland

**Tel:** 087 1487124

**Homepage:** [ https://www.kinshipcare.ie ](https://www.kinshipcare.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.kinshipcare.ie/contact/
](https://www.kinshipcare.ie/contact/)

**Email:** [ info@kinshipcare.ie ](mailto:info@kinshipcare.ie)

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 18 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/kinship-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Kinship%20care&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/kinship-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/adoption-and-fostering/kinship-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Kinship%20care&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/kinship-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Children and the care system_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-and-the-care-system/)

Overview of the child care system in Ireland. What are the different types of
court orders?

957.0433

  * [ _Checklist when applying for carer's leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-leave/)

Describes the different procedures involved when you are applying for carer's
leave.

781.7096

  * [ _Payments to carers_ ](/en/social-welfare/carers/payments-to-carers/)

Find out about the different payments and benefits for carers.

762.1727

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

