**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ After your baby is born ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/) > Supports for postnatal depression

#  Supports for postnatal depression

  * Introduction 
  * Supports for postnatal depression 
  * Advice for family and friends 

##  Introduction

Postnatal depression affects 10 to 15% of women within the first year of
giving birth. The symptoms of postnatal depression sometimes start as baby
blues and then get worse. For some women, the symptoms take time to develop
and may be most obvious when your baby is 4 to 6 months old.

[ Symptoms of postnatal depression ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/mental-
health/postnatal-depression/postnatal-depression.html) vary from person to
person. You may have mild or severe symptoms. No matter what symptoms you
have, there are supports available to help.

##  Supports for postnatal depression

If you think you are experiencing postnatal depression, it is important to [
ask for help ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/mental-health/postnatal-
depression/getting-help.html) . You can [ contact your public health nurse
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/healthcentres/) or [ call your GP
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/find-a-gp/) anytime to discuss how you are
feeling. If you do not feel up to calling your GP, you can ask someone you
trust (such as a partner, friend or family member) to make an appointment for
you.

Other organisations, including charities and parent support groups, are
available too.

Some private health insurance companies include cover for counselling services
under their mother and baby plans. Check with your insurer to see what is
available to you.

###  Postnatal Depression Ireland

[ Postnatal Depression Ireland ](http://www.pnd.ie/) is a non-profit
organisation that provides free information, support and friendship to women
with postnatal depression. They also host coffee mornings and support
meetings.

It can be contacted on 021 4922083, or 086 7872107. Alternatively, you can
email [ support@pnd.ie ](mailto:support@pnd.ie) .

###  Cuidiú

Cuidiú is a parent-to-parent voluntary support charity offering free [
information about postnatal depression
](https://www.cuidiu.ie/Supports_Parenthood_PostnatalDepression) . The charity
also has parent-to-parent supporters who can chat and listen to you by email,
phone or online. Find contact details for your local support worker on [ the
Cuidiú website ](https://www.cuidiu.ie/supports_parenthood_supporters) .

###  Parentline

[ Parentline ](https://www.parentline.ie/) is a national, confidential
helpline offering support, information and guidance on all aspects of being a
parent, including [ postnatal depression
](https://www.parentline.ie/postnatal-depression/) . You can call them for
anonymous advice on 1890 927277 or 01 8733500 Monday to Thursday 10am to 9pm,
and Fridays 10am to 4pm.

###  Samaritans

If you need to speak to someone right away, call [ Samaritans
](https://www.samaritans.org/ireland/samaritans-ireland/) for free on **116
123** . This helpline is open 24/7, 365 days a year.

You can also contact Samaritans by email at jo@samaritans.ie, or [ download
the self-help app ](https://www.samaritans.org/ireland/how-we-can-
help/contact-samaritan/self-help/) .

###  Aware

The [ Aware Support Line ](https://www.aware.ie/support/support-line/) is a
free helpline for anyone aged 18 and over. If you need support and information
about your mood (or the mood of a friend or family member), you can freephone
1800 80 48 48 or email [ supportmail@aware.ie ](mailto:supportmail@aware.ie) .

###  Text 50808

50808 is a free 24/7 text service, offering everything from a calming chat to
immediate support for people going through a mental health or emotional
crisis. The service is funded by the HSE.

Text HELLO to 50808 to start a conversation, or visit the [ 50808 website
](https://text50808.ie/) for more details.

##  Advice for family and friends

If you think someone you care about is suffering from postnatal depression, it
is important to [ recognise the symptoms
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/mental-health/postnatal-depression/postnatal-
depression.html) and remember that it is treatable.

You will need to provide lots of support, help and encouragement during this
time. As with all illnesses, recovery may be slow and there will be good and
bad days. Try to be patient and understanding.

The HSE has [ advice for partners, friends and families
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/mental-health/postnatal-depression/advice-
for-partners-and-families.html) , or you can contact your GP for advice on how
to help. The Nurture Health website also has information on [ how to support
someone with postnatal depression ](https://nurturehealth.ie/pnd-support-
others/) .

###  Mind yourself too

Supporting someone with postnatal depression can be worrying and stressful.
Remember to look after yourself during this time too.

Speak to your friends or family about how you are feeling, and ask them for
help if you need it. Or, you can [ contact your GP
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/find-a-gp/) to chat about any concerns you
have.

_**Page edited:** 8 February 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-
depression/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Supports%20for%20postnatal%20depression&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-
depression/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-
depression/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Supports%20for%20postnatal%20depression&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-
depression/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Postnatal check-ups for you and your baby_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/postnatal-care/)

Find out what happens at you and your baby's postnatal check-ups, and when
they happen.

1454.834

  * [ _Social welfare supports for Ukrainian refugees_ ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/social-welfare-supports-for-ukrainian-refugees/)

Information about the social welfare payments and supports available to
Ukrainian refugees.

1170.8369

  * [ _Financial supports for students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/financial-supports-for-students/)

Information on other financial supports for students in further and higher
education.

1118.1216

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

