**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Separation, divorce and dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/) > Dissolution decree to end a
civil partnership

#  Dissolution decree to end a civil partnership

  * What is a decree of dissolution? 
  * Conditions necessary for getting a dissolution 
  * How to apply for a dissolution 
  * Legal advice 
  * Further information 

##  What is a decree of dissolution?

A decree of dissolution formally ends a civil partnership. If a court is
satisfied that the required conditions (see 'Rules' below) are met, the court
will grant the decree of dissolution, dissolving the civil partnership. When
it grants the decree of dissolution, the court may also make orders in
relation to the payment of [ maintenance ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/) and
lump sums, the transfer of property, the extinguishment of succession rights,
[ pension ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-
pensions/) rights etc.

Both of you must be living separate lives (see 'Living apart' below) for 2
years before an application for a dissolution can be made. You may decide to
enter into a [ separation agreement ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/) to regulate
matters between you before you seek a dissolution.

In any application for a decree of dissolution, the court can review any
previous arrangements made by you both such as a separation agreement,
particularly if the circumstances of either of you have changed.

When a decree of dissolution is granted, it cannot be reversed.

Either of you can apply to court to have any orders made under the decree -
such as a maintenance order - reviewed by the court.

###  Marriage Act 2015

Following the commencement of the Marriage Act 2015 on 16 November 2015, you
can no longer register a civil partnership in Ireland. Civil partnerships
registered abroad since 16 May 2016 are not recognised in Ireland.

Couples already in a civil partnership can apply to marry or remain as they
are. If you decide to marry, your civil partnership is automatically
dissolved.

##  Conditions necessary for getting a dissolution

Before a court can grant a dissolution, the following conditions must be met:

  * You must have been living apart from one another for a period amounting to 2 out of the previous 3 years before the application is made 
  * Proper arrangements must have been made or will be made for each other and any dependent child or children 

**Living apart**

The [ Family Law Act 2019 (pdf)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/act/37/enacted/en/pdf) provides a
definition of ‘living apart’ to give certainty to the interpretation of the
term in the Irish courts. It clarifies that civil partners who live in the
same home as one another are considered to be living apart if the civil
partners are not living together as a couple in an intimate and committed
relationship. The Act also sets out that a relationship does not cease to be
an intimate relationship merely because the relationship is no longer sexual
in nature.

If these conditions are met, either of you may apply to court for a decree of
dissolution.

##  How to apply for a dissolution

You are not legally required to use a [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) or a [ barrister
](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) . If you wish, you can choose to
represent yourself. However, there may be complex issues which may make it
very difficult to apply for a dissolution without some professional help.

When applying for a dissolution in the [ Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-
system/circuit-court/) , you will be required to submit 3 documents initially:

  * An application form (known as a civil partnership civil bill). This document describes both you and your civil partner, your occupations and where you live. It also sets out when you registered your civil partnership, for how long you have been living apart and the names and birth dates of your children. 
  * A sworn statement of means (Form 51). This document sets out your assets, your income, your debts, your liabilities and your outgoings. 
  * A sworn statement relating to the welfare of any dependent children (Form 37B). This document sets out the personal details of the children. It describes where they live and with whom. It also describes their education and training, their health, childcare arrangements and maintenance and access arrangements. 

There is no requirement to submit a document certifying that you have been
advised of the alternatives to dissolution, unlike in divorce applications.

When all of the necessary documents have been filed, you will be given a date
for the court hearing. The hearing will be held in private and you will need
to show the court that you meet the requirements of the [ Civil Partnership
and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) . If the
court is satisfied that you have grounds for a dissolution, it will grant a
decree of dissolution.

##  Legal advice

Legal advice and representation is always advisable. If you and your civil
partner disagree about any issue at all it is strongly advised that you talk
to a family law solicitor. You and your partner should not use the same
solicitor.

To enquire whether you are [ eligible for Legal Aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-
and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) , you can [ contact your nearest
law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) . Legal
Aid is not free and everyone must pay a contribution towards costs.

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres)
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.flac.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CMoira.Fraser%40ciboard.ie%7C6003ac21371841ee4d9008dc57cbaf6e%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638481779534958139%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=IRVd8UpJVDK4GtmUExSMn71M80oy0Kxvgk7umNpZ6vc%3D&reserved=0)
is an independent, voluntary organisation. A limited number of [ FLAC phone
clinic appointments ](https://www.flac.ie/help/advice/) are offered in
conjunction with [ Citizen Information Services
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcentres.citizensinformation.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CMoira.Fraser%40ciboard.ie%7C6003ac21371841ee4d9008dc57cbaf6e%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638481779534973218%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=PWAIHWpLyGDAn04tjg40HZExuQuckU6HVSOtHycEwY0%3D&reserved=0)
around the country. These appointments are with a volunteer lawyer and are
confidential and free of charge. Contact your nearest [ Citizens Information
Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on FLAC
phone clinic appointments in your area. FLAC’s [ Information and Referral Line
](https://www.flac.ie/help/infoline/) for basic legal information is open
Monday to Friday from 9.30am-1pm.

If you choose to hire a private solicitor, you should be aware that there is
no fixed rate of charges for legal fees. You are advised to obtain some quotes
before deciding on a legal firm. You can [ find contact details for solicitors
and firms ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/)
throughout Ireland on lawsociety.ie.

##  Further information

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 11 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-
dissolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Dissolution%20decree%20to%20end%20a%20civil%20partnership&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-
dissolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-
dissolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Dissolution%20decree%20to%20end%20a%20civil%20partnership&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-
dissolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Factors considered by a court in a separation/divorce/dissolution_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/factors-in-separation-divorce/)

What are the factors considered by a court in making ancillary orders in an
application for a decree of judicial separation, divorce or dissolution?

1338.0632

  * [ _Civil partnership and inheritance_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-partnership-and-inheritance/)

This page describes your right to inheritance in a civil partnership.

1307.126

  * [ _How pensions are assessed during a separation, divorce and dissolution_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)

When you end a relationship by judicial separation, divorce or dissolution,
the court can decide to share your pension with your former partner and (or)
any dependent children. This is called a pension adjustment order.

1174.1348

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

