**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Adoption, fostering and surrogacy ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/) > Surrogacy in Ireland

#  Surrogacy in Ireland

  * What is surrogacy? 
  * Legal status and rights of the parents 
  * Getting legal guardianship and custody of your child 
  * Surrogacy arrangements abroad 
  * Legal developments in the regulation of surrogacy 
  * Getting legal advice 
  * Further information about surrogacy in Ireland 

##  What is surrogacy?

_Surrogacy_ is where a _surrogate mother_ agrees to become pregnant and carry
a baby to term for another couple or individual. When the baby is born, the
surrogate mother gives the baby to the couple or person with whom she made the
agreement. The intended parents or parent of the child (the adults who will
raise the child) are known as the _commissioning couple_ or the _commissioning
person_ .

Commissioning parents do not automatically have the same rights as other
parents. For example, as the commissioning mother does not become pregnant,
she cannot get maternity leave. Read more in the section ‘Legal status and
rights of the parents’ below.

###  Types of surrogacy

Surrogacy arrangements can be either:

  * Domestic (the whole process takes place in Ireland) 
  * International (aspects of the process happen abroad, for example, the surrogate mother conceives and gives birth to the child abroad, before the commissioning parents take the child home to Ireland). 

_Altruistic surrogacy_ is where the surrogate mother wants to help the couple
trying to conceive, without getting a financial reward. _Commercial surrogacy_
is where the surrogate mother carries a baby in exchange for payment. Both
altruistic and commercial surrogacy arrangements are unregulated in Ireland at
present.

Before you choose to have a baby by surrogacy, you should get legal advice
from a solicitor who specialises in family law and surrogacy arrangements. See
‘Getting legal advice’ below.

###  Why choose surrogacy?

People choose surrogacy for different reasons, for example:

  * Infertility 
  * A medical condition that makes it impossible or dangerous for the woman to get pregnant or give birth 
  * Same-sex couples who want to expand their family 
  * Single individuals who want to become a parent 

###  Whose DNA is used in surrogacy?

Surrogacy can take place using _artificial insemination_ (AI) or _in vitro
fertilization_ (IVF) techniques. Surrogacy can also be carried out without
medical intervention.

Surrogacy can take place using either:

  * The commissioning mother’s egg and the commissioning father’s sperm 
  * The commissioning mother’s egg and donor sperm 
  * The surrogate mother’s egg the commissioning father’s sperm 
  * The surrogate mother’s egg and donor sperm 
  * Donor egg and the commissioning father’s sperm 
  * Donor egg and sperm, or donor embryo 

##  Legal status and rights of the parents

Currently, there is no specific legislation for surrogacy in Ireland. It is
not legal or illegal.

Current Irish legislation does not cover the specific legal issues that arise
in surrogacy. Instead, the legal status and rights of all people involved are
covered by the laws dealing with non-surrogate births.

This means the surrogate mother, who gives birth to the child, is the child’s
legal mother and guardian. This is the case even if she is not the biological
mother of the child (where her egg is not used).

Also, if the surrogate mother is married or was married around the date of
conception, then her husband is generally presumed, in Irish law, to be the
father of the child (unless it is proven otherwise). This is set out in [
Section 46 of the Status of Children Act 1987
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1987/en/act/pub/0026/sec0046.html#sec46) .
The husband will also, along with the surrogate mother, be the joint guardian
of the child.

If the surrogate mother is not married, then she is the sole automatic
guardian of the child.

###  How does this impact the commissioning parents?

As the _commissioning mother_ (the intended mother of the child) is not
considered the ‘legal mother’, the commissioning mother has no legal
connection to the child at birth. She does not have a right to make decisions
in relation to:

  * Birth registration 
  * Citizenship and passports 
  * Succession rights (for example, inheritance) 
  * Childcare 
  * Adoption 
  * Social welfare 
  * Education 

###  Entitlement to leave

Similarly, as the commissioning mother does not become pregnant, she is not
entitled to [ statutory maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) (although an employer may
still grant it at its discretion) or [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/) if she is in employment.
However, she (and her partner) may be able to get [ parental leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-
leave/) .

The commissioning couple may also be entitled to [ parent’s leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-
leave/) , depending on their circumstances. The father of a child born through
surrogacy can qualify for parent’s leave if he is the biological father of the
child and declared to be the parent of the child. In these circumstances, the
father's partner may qualify for parent's leave if they are married to, in a
civil partnership or cohabiting with the child’s biological father.

If the commissioning couple is entitled to [ parent’s leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-
leave/) , they may also be able to get [ Parent’s Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/) . However, it’s possible to
qualify for parent’s leave and not qualify for Parent’s Benefit (for example,
if you don’t meet the PRSI contribution conditions).

##  Getting legal guardianship and custody of your child

If the _commissioning father_ is the genetic or biological father of the
child, he can apply for [ guardianship of the child ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/guardianship-and-cohabiting-couples/) under
the Guardianship of Infants Act 1964.

However, **his partner does not** have an immediate right to make such an
application (even if she is the child’s biological mother). Instead, if the
couple is married or in a civil partnership, the partner must **wait 2 years
before seeking guardianship or custody rights** . These 2 years will show the
court that the parent had day-to-day responsibility for the child’s care.

If the couple are _cohabitating_ (living together but not married or in a
civil partnership), the partner must **wait 3 years** before applying for
guardianship or custody.

This has no impact on the surrogate mother’s status as the child’s legal
mother and guardian.

###  Adoption

Alternatively, the commissioning parents can seek to [ adopt the child
](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/domestic-adoption/) in
order to have a legal relationship with it.

If the child is being adopted, this must be done through the Adoption
Authority of Ireland. In this case, there is no guarantee that the child of a
surrogate mother would be placed with the commissioning parents.

Private adoptions are not allowed. The legal parent of a child (the surrogate
mother) cannot be paid to place the child for adoption.

##  Surrogacy arrangements abroad

Some couples choose to go abroad to use a surrogate. If you enter into a
surrogacy arrangement abroad, you will need to prepare for issues such as
citizenship and travel documents for the child.

Normally, DNA testing to prove the genetic parentage is necessary before the
child can be taken to Ireland by a person other than the surrogate mother. You
can read [ advice on citizenship, parentage, guardianship and travel document
issues (pdf)
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/20120221%20Guidance%20Document.pdf/Files/20120221%20Guidance%20Document.pdf)
in relation to children born through surrogacy abroad. You should also speak
to a solicitor who specialises in surrogacy arrangements - see 'Getting legal
advice' below.

##  Legal developments in the regulation of surrogacy

It has long been recommended that a child born through surrogacy should be
presumed to be the child of the commissioning couple, rather than the
surrogate mother. This was set out in the [ Report of the Commission on
Assisted Human Reproduction (2005) (pdf) ](http://health.gov.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/Report-of-The-Commission-on-Assisted-Human-
Reproduction.pdf) . The Commission also recommended that a regulatory body be
set up for assisted human reproduction, including surrogacy.

The Assisted Human Reproduction Bill was first published in 2017 and it
contained proposals to regulate many aspects of assisted human reproduction
and domestic surrogacy.

The Joint Oireachtas Health Committee undertook pre-legislative scrutiny of
the General Scheme of the Assisted Human Reproduction Bill and, in 2019,
issued its [ report with recommendations for improvement of the legislation
(pdf)
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/32/joint_committee_on_health/reports/2019/2019-07-10_report-
on-pre-legislative-scrutiny-of-the-general-scheme-of-the-assisted-human-
reproduction-bill_en.pdf) .

In April 2021, the [ Review of Children’s Rights and Best Interests in the
Context of Donor Assisted Human Reproduction and Surrogacy in Irish Law
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/3e601-a-review-of-childrens-rights-and-
best-interests-in-the-context-of-donorassisted-human-reproa-review-of-
childrens-rights-and-best-interests-in-the-context-of-donor-assisted-human-
reproduction-and-surrogacy-in-irish-law-duction-and-surrogacy-in-irish-law/)
was published. The review made many recommendations, including that
comprehensive legislation regulating surrogacy be enacted in Ireland at the
earliest opportunity.

On 10 March 2022, the [ Health (Assisted Human Reproduction) Bill 2022
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2022/29/) was published. On 29 May
2024, the Bill was passed by the Dáil and it now proceeds to Second Stage in
the Seanad.

The main purposes of the Bill are to:

  * Put in place a specific regulatory framework for the for the provision of assisted human reproduction (AHR) treatment and related research 
  * Allow for the establishment of the Assisted Human Reproduction Regulatory Authority (AHRRA) 
  * Set out criteria for the provision of AHR treatments including posthumous assisted human reproduction and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis 
  * Set out the circumstances under which surrogacy may be permitted in Ireland, including that the surrogacy agreement is gestational only (that is, the surrogate’s egg is not used) 
  * Ensure that any child born will have a genetic link to at least one intending parent 

Under the Bill, any surrogacy agreement must also be non-commercial
(altruistic) and approved by the AHRRA in advance.

On 26 June 2024, the [ Health (Assisted Human Reproduction) Bill 2022 (pdf)
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/bill/2022/29/eng/ver_b/b29b22d.pdf)
was passed by both Houses of the Oireachtas. The legislation needs to be
commenced to come into effect.

###  **Past domestic surrogacy**

[ Part 12 of the Health (Assisted Human Reproduction) Bill 2022
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/bill/2022/29/eng/ver_b/b29b22d.pdf)
deals with the recognition of past domestic surrogacy agreements (a past
domestic surrogacy agreement is any surrogacy agreement before the date of
commencement of Section 204 involving:

(i) A surrogate mother who had been living in Ireland for at least one year
before the surrogacy agreement was made and

(ii) At least one intending parent who had been living for at least one year
before the surrogacy agreement was made

Section 204 only applies where at least one of the intending parents provided
an egg or sperm.

####  Parental orders

When commenced, Section 204 will allow the intending parent or parents of a
child born in the State as a result of assisted human reproduction under a
domestic surrogacy agreement where at least one of the intending parents
provided an egg or sperm to apply to the court for a parental order.

Where the court grants a parental order in respect of a child:

  * The child becomes the child of the intending parent or parents named in the order 
  * The child is no longer the child of any person other than a person named as a parent in the order 
  * The child will be considered, with regard to the rights and duties of parents and children in relation to each other, as the child of the intending parent or parents named in the order, 
  * The surrogate mother of the child will lose all parental rights and will no longer have any parental duties in respect of the child 

This page will be updated as the Bill and its provisions progress.

###  International surrogacy

A Joint Committee on International Surrogacy was asked to consider and make
recommendations on measures to address issues arising from international
surrogacy. In July 2022, the [ Final Report of the Joint Committee on
International Surrogacy (pdf)
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/committee/dail/33/joint_committee_on_international_surrogacy/reports/2022/2022-07-06_final-
report-of-the-joint-committee-on-international-surrogacy_en.pdf) was
published.

On 13 December 2022, the Government announced that it has approved policy and
legislative proposals on international surrogacy and the recognition of
certain past surrogacy arrangements. A supplementary Bill is to be presented
separately in autumn 2024 to address outstanding issues relating to
international surrogacy and the recognition of past international surrogacy.

##  Getting legal advice

If you are considering entering into a surrogacy arrangement, you should seek
legal advice, ideally from a family law solicitor who specialises in surrogacy
arrangements.

The solicitor will give you all the relevant information in relation to:

  * The various legal issues associated with surrogacy 
  * The importance of signing a surrogacy agreement 
  * The documentation and forms you need to prepare (particularly if you are choosing surrogacy abroad) 
  * How to apply for guardianship of the child so that you can legally make decisions in relation to their care 

You can find [ contact information for solicitors throughout Ireland
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/) on the Law Society website.

##  Further information about surrogacy in Ireland

You can find support and information about fertility treatments on the [
National Infertility Support and Information Group (NISIG)
](https://nisig.com/) website. Or, read more in our page on [ Fertility
treatments and assisted human reproduction in Ireland ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/fertility-treatments-and-dahr/) .

You may also want to [ contact Irish Families Through Surrogacy (IFTS) on
Facebook ](https://www.facebook.com/Irishfamiliesthroughsurrogacy/) . You can
also [ follow IFTS on Twitter ](https://twitter.com/irishfamiliests) and [ on
Instagram
](https://www.instagram.com/irishfamiliesthroughsurrogacy/?utm_medium=copy_link)
.

_**Page edited:** 1 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-
fostering/surrogacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Surrogacy%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-
fostering/surrogacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/adoption-and-
fostering/surrogacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Surrogacy%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-
fostering/surrogacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

1254.7234

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001–2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

1181.9326

  * [ _The law on defamation in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/law-on-defamation/)

You can take legal action against a person or corporation who makes a
‘defamatory statement’ to another person.

1143.4886

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

