**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ After your baby is born ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/) > Breastfeeding

#  Breastfeeding

  * Introduction 
  * Getting help with breastfeeding 
  * Breastfeeding in public in Ireland 
  * Breastfeeding and employment 
  * Returning to work while still breastfeeding 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

There are many benefits of breastfeeding for both you and your baby. Your
breast milk provides all the nutrients your baby needs for growth and
development. When you come into contact with a virus or bacteria, your body
will make antibodies to protect itself. These antibodies are passed into your
breast milk so your baby is protected too. Breastfeeding also helps your womb
recover more quickly after birth and reduces your risk of certain diseases.
You can read more about the [ benefits of breastfeeding for you and your baby
](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/a-good-start/importance/)
on the HSE website.

Breastfeeding is a natural way to feed your baby, though it can be difficult
particularly at the start. It's a skill that you and your baby learn together.
You are more likely to succeed if you have support and [ all the information
you need ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-and-toddlers/breastfeeding/) .

[ MyChild.ie ](https://www2.hse.ie/my-
child/?utm_source=internal&utm_medium=search&utm_campaign=my_child) from the
HSE has information on pregnancy, baby and toddler health, and related health
services and support.

##  Getting help with breastfeeding

You can prepare for breastfeeding in advance of your baby’s arrival. The more
information you have, the more likely you are to [ get off to a good start and
succeed ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/a-good-start/) .

The HSE has information on [ everything you need to know about breastfeeding
](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/support/what-happens-
support-group/) , for example:

  * [ Where to get expert information ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/ask-our-breastfeeding-expert/)
  * [ Antenatal classes ](https://www2.hse.ie/pregnancy-birth/pregnancy-care/antenatal-classes/)
  * [ How to express milk ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/expressing-pumping/)
  * [ Positioning and attachment of your baby ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/a-good-start/positioning-and-attachment/)
  * [ Breastfeeding support groups near you ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/support/)

If you find breastfeeding difficult or have questions about it, there are many
people who can help and support you.

###  Antenatal classes before you give birth

When you are pregnant, [ antenatal classes ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/antenatal-classes/) can help you
prepare for the birth of your baby. The classes cover a wide range of topics
including breastfeeding. Some hospitals run special breastfeeding programmes
that you can sign up for when you are pregnant so you can prepare yourself for
breastfeeding and talk to experts about any questions your may have. Check
with your local hospital or public health nurse what classes are available in
your area.

###  At the hospital or at home

After you give birth, your midwife will have lots of experience with
breastfeeding mothers and will be able to help you get started. You can also [
get help from lactation consultants ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/ask-our-
breastfeeding-expert/) who have specific training in breastfeeding support.
Many hospitals run a weekly drop-in breastfeeding clinic so you can talk to
breastfeeding experts and other mothers, and get ongoing support.

###  At your local health centre

[ Breastfeeding support groups ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/breastfeeding-
support-search/) are run by public health nurses and lactation consultants in
your local health centre. Meetings usually take place weekly. You and other
mothers can meet breastfeeding experts, share information and discuss any
problems you might have. Check where and when your [ local breastfeeding
support group ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/breastfeeding-support-search/)
takes place.

###  Breastfeeding counsellors

Your public health nurse or general practice nurse can also refer you to a
community lactation consultant for expert advice. The HSE also has a ‘ [ Ask
our breastfeeding expert’ ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/ask-our-
breastfeeding-expert/) service where you can ‘live chat’ or email a
breastfeeding expert for advice, Monday to Friday, 10am – 3pm.

Cuidiú has [ trained breastfeeding counsellors
](https://www.cuidiu.ie/supports_breastfeeding_counsellors) all over the
country.

La Leche League of Ireland is a voluntary group which provides information and
support to parents who want to breastfeed their babies. Their [ services
include telephone counselling and monthly group meetings
](https://www.lalecheleagueireland.com/groups/) .

###  Breastfeeding support groups

Breastfeeding support groups take place all around Ireland. At breastfeeding
support groups, mothers share breastfeeding advice and socialise. There are
also opportunities to speak with a breastfeeding expert about any questions
you have. These groups also encourage pregnant women to come along before you
have your baby if you are considering breastfeeding and want to find out how
to prepare.

Both [ Cuidiú
](https://www.cuidiu.ie/supports_breastfeeding_breastfeedinggroups) and [ La
Leche League of Ireland ](https://www.lalecheleagueireland.com/groups/)
organise breastfeeding support groups and coffee mornings.

[ Friends of Breastfeeding ](https://www.friendsofbreastfeeding.ie/) have
trained ‘Breastfeeding Buddies’ who are available to give you breastfeeding
support by text, phone, email or video call.

You can read more about what [ happens at a breastfeeding support group
](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/breastfeeding/support/what-happens-
support-group/) .

##  Breastfeeding in public in Ireland

You can breastfeed in any public place in Ireland and you do not have to ask
anyone for permission. Some places may offer a private area if you would like
this, but you do not have to use it.

##  Breastfeeding and employment

If you are working in Ireland and breastfeeding your baby, you are entitled to
take time off work each day to breastfeed. This applies to all women (or
birthing parents) in employment who have given birth within the previous 2
years (104 weeks). You are entitled to have your normal rest breaks as well.

Employers do not have to provide facilities in the workplace to facilitate
breastfeeding if providing such facilities would give rise to considerable
costs. At the choice of your employer, you are entitled to:

  * [ Breastfeed in the workplace ](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/child-health/breastfeeding-and-work.html) or [ express breast milk ](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/child-health/expressing-breast-milk/when-you-might-want-to-express.html) , where suitable facilities are available in your workplace, or 
  * Have your working hours reduced (without loss of pay) to facilitate breastfeeding where suitable facilities are not available. 

If you are working and breastfeeding, you are entitled to take 1 hour off work
(with pay) each day as a breastfeeding break for up to 2 years (104 weeks)
after birth. This time may be taken as:

  * One 60 minute break 
  * Two 30 minute breaks 
  * Three 20 minute breaks 

Breaks may be longer and more frequent if agreed between you and your
employer. Check with your employer what their policy is.

Part-time workers are also entitled to breastfeeding breaks, calculated on a
pro-rata basis.

Your employer cannot deduct pay for the time you took on a breastfeeding
break. Your right to time off is set out under Section 9 of the [ Maternity
Protection (Amendment) Act 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2004/en/act/pub/0028/index.html) , as amended
by the [ Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2023
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2023/act/8/enacted/en/print#sec34) .

##  Returning to work while still breastfeeding

If you want to continue to breastfeed when you return to work, you must notify
your employer (in writing) of your intention to breastfeed at work. You should
confirm this at least 4 weeks before the date you plan to return to work from
your maternity leave. Employers can require you to supply the child’s birth
certificate (or some other document confirming the child’s date of birth).

##  More information

The Health Service Executive (HSE) website has a wide range of [ information
and resources for anyone planning to breastfeed ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-
and-toddlers/breastfeeding/) . It has advice, tips and information for parents
interested in breastfeeding and details of [ support groups
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/breastfeeding-support-search/) throughout the
country.

_**Page edited:** 22 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-
born/breastfeeding/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Breastfeeding&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-
born/breastfeeding/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-
born/breastfeeding/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Breastfeeding&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-
born/breastfeeding/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mother and baby and county home institutions_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/mother-and-baby-homes/)

This page describes the Commission of Investigation into Mother and Baby
Homes, and the main actions set out by Government to address the needs of the
people who spent time in mother and baby and county home institutions.

743.74915

  * [ _Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/mother-and-baby-institutions-payment-scheme/)

Information on the application process for the Mother and Baby Institutions
Payment Scheme.

714.2958

  * [ _Benefits and entitlements relating to birth and children_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/benefits-and-entitlements-relating-to-birth/)

There is a range of benefits and entitlements to support women who are having
a baby. This document gives a general overview of these supports.

628.8332

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

