**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Separation, divorce and dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/) > Succession rights following a
separation, divorce or dissolution

#  Succession rights following a separation, divorce or dissolution

  * What are succession rights? 
  * Succession rights after a separation 
  * Succession rights after a divorce 
  * Can I apply for a share of my former spouse’s estate? 
  * What if I have a will? 
  * More information 

##  What are succession rights?

Succession is when a person dies and their property is inherited by their
spouse, civil partner, or children.

Succession rights are set out in law. This means that if your spouse or civil
partner dies, you are automatically entitled to a share of their _estate_ .
Their estate is all their possessions, including money, belongings, and
property.

##  Succession rights after a separation

When you legally separate from your spouse or civil partner, you can choose to
give up your succession rights.

If you and your spouse have a formal [ separation agreement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/separation-agreement/) , you may have already given up your
succession rights.

If the court granted you a decree of [ judicial separation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/judicial-separation/) , it may have made an order to say your
succession rights have ended.

The court will only renounce (give up) your succession rights if it is
satisfied that you will be properly provided for.

###  **What if I am not legally separated?**

If you and your spouse were living apart, but you did not have a formal [
separation agreement ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/judicial-separation/) or [ divorce
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) , you are still viewed as spouses by the law.
This means you are still entitled to the appropriate share of your deceased
spouse’s estate (possessions).

##  Succession rights after a divorce

If you are divorced, you do not have automatic succession rights to your ex-
spouse's estate. This is because succession rights end when the court grants a
‘ [ decree of divorce ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) ’.

However, your ex-spouse may leave something to you in their will.

In certain circumstances, you can apply to the court for a share of your
former spouse’s estate. Read ‘applying for a share of your former spouse’s
estate’ below.

##  Can I apply for a share of my former spouse’s estate?

As a divorced spouse, or a civil partner whose civil partnership has been
dissolved, you can apply to the court for a share of your former spouse’s
estate if:

  * You apply within 6 months of the [ Grant of Probate or Administration ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/)
  * You have not remarried 

Your application will only be successful if the court finds that you were not
properly provided for in the divorce or dissolution. Often during divorce or
dissolution proceedings, the court will make an order which bars you from
making this type of application.

##  What if I have a will?

A [ will ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/before-a-death/making-
a-will/) is a written document explaining what you would like to happen to
your possessions after you die.

Your spouse or civil partner is still legally entitled to a share in your
estate, even if your will does not mention them.

##  More information

The law on succession rights is set out in the [ Succession Act 1965
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1965_0027.htm)
.

If you are unsure about your succession rights after a separation or divorce,
[ contact your solicitor for advice
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/married-
couples/marital-status-and-inheritance/#lea601) .

Find more information on [ what happens to a deceased person’s money and
possessions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-deceaseds-
estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

You may also want to read about [ marital status and inheritance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/married-
couples/marital-status-and-inheritance/) and [ inheritance rights of
cohabiting couples ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/) .

_**Page edited:** 13 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/succession/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Succession%20rights%20following%20a%20separation%2C%20divorce%20or%20dissolution&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/succession/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-
divorce/succession/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Succession%20rights%20following%20a%20separation%2C%20divorce%20or%20dissolution&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/succession/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Capital taxes following separation, divorce or dissolution_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-divorce/)

How capital taxes apply in the case of separation, divorce or dissolution,
including capital gains tax, capital acquisitions tax and stamp duty.

1971.7322

  * [ _Separation and divorce: children_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-and-divorce-children/)

Information on the implications for guardianship, custody and access to
children following separation and divorce.

1301.179

  * [ _How pensions are assessed during a separation, divorce and dissolution_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)

When you end a relationship by judicial separation, divorce or dissolution,
the court can decide to share your pension with your former partner and (or)
any dependent children. This is called a pension adjustment order.

1299.912

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

