**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/) > Property rights of cohabiting couples

#  Property rights of cohabiting couples

  * What is a cohabiting couple? 
  * Cohabitation agreements 
  * Buying a home together 
  * Local authority housing 
  * Getting legal advice 

##  What is a cohabiting couple?

A _cohabiting couple_ is a couple that lives together in an intimate and
committed relationship, who are not married to each other and not in a civil
partnership. Cohabiting couples can be opposite-sex or same-sex. A cohabiting
relationship can continue to be ‘intimate’ even if it is not sexual.

In Ireland, cohabiting couples have certain rights in relation to property,
custody of children, maintenance and inheritance. To qualify for these rights,
you must be cohabiting **for at least 5 years** (or **2 years** if you have
dependent children together).

The law on the rights of cohabitants is set out in the [ Civil Partnership and
Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2010/act/24/enacted/en/html) .

##  Cohabitation agreements

Couples who live together can choose to enter into a _cohabitation agreement_
(also called a _cohabitant’s agreement_ ). This is a signed contract setting
out your financial interests if your relationship should end (including what
will happen to certain assets, such as your shared property).

In the event of a break-up, a cohabitation agreement can make the division of
your assets more straightforward.

You and your partner must [ get legal advice ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-and-unmarried-couples#lea601)
before entering into a cohabitant’s agreement, and it must be **signed by both
of you** to be valid. Once signed, the agreement can be enforced by the court.

In exceptional circumstances, the court can _vary_ (change aspects of) or _set
aside_ your cohabitation agreement, where enforcing it would cause serious
injustice.

##  Buying a home together

When buying a home with your partner, you will need to decide whether to
register the property with land registry as either:

  * Joint tenants, or 
  * Tenants-in-common 

Before you make your decision, it is important that you understand the nature
of each type of ownership and title. How you will co-own the property can
affect your capacity to deal with the property in the future.

Always get professional legal advice before choosing a home ownership option.
Your decision may impact your [ property rights in the event of a breakup
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)
, or [ in the case of a death ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-
couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/) .

###  Joint tenancy

Joint tenancy is the most common type of co-ownership title. _Joint tenancy_
means you both co-own the property in **equal shares** . You cannot sell or
rent the property without your cohabitant’s consent. If one cohabitant dies,
the other person will automatically own all of the property.

However, if you are not married or civil partners and your partner dies, you
(the surviving joint tenant of the property) may be liable for [ Capital
Acquisition Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-
tax/) as a result of becoming full owner of the property through survivorship.
Your partner is effectively ‘gifting’ you their share of the property, but
because you are not married (or civil partners), you may have to pay Capital
Acquisition Tax which is applicable to gifts and inheritances.

You can be co-owners in a joint tenancy even if one person contributes more
financially to the property than the other person. However, if one person has
paid more for the property and the house is sold at a later date, the other
person may, in some circumstances, get less than 50% of the proceeds.

Similarly, if you contribute a smaller amount to the purchase price of the
property, your cohabitant is effectively ‘gifting’ you a larger part of your
property entitlement. In the event that your cohabitant dies, this ‘gift’ may
be liable for Capital Acquisition Tax.

As there may be tax implications for cohabitants in a joint tenancy, you
should always get professional legal advice. See ‘Getting legal advice’ below.

###  Tenancy in common

_Tenancy in common_ means 2 people own the property in **defined shares** ,
for example, 50/50, 75/25, 60/40.

Each person can leave their share of the property to whoever they wish
(including their partner), but they must [ make a will ](/en/death/before-a-
death/making-a-will/) stating this fact.

If you do not make a will, your share of the property becomes _part of your
estate_ if you die. Your partner may be forced to sell the home to allow the
administration of your estate.

In addition, your family (or even a separated spouse or civil partner) can
claim this share. Your surviving partner does not have any automatic right to
your share of the property.

Read more about [ dealing with a deceased person's estate ](/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

###  Selling the home

If you are cohabiting with your partner in _their_ house, they do not need
your written consent before they can sell or lease the house.

If you co-own the home, the property cannot be sold without both people’s
written consent.

Read about your [ property rights and the breakdown of a relationship
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-
relationship#lf2ab8) .

##  Local authority housing

Cohabiting couples can apply for local authority housing (also called _social
housing_ ). Local authority housing is generally allocated based on your need
for housing and whether you can afford to pay for your own accommodation.

You and your partner can apply for the allocation of a house to be held in
joint tenancy (see above).

If you move in to a local authority house where your partner is already the
sole tenant, you can apply for joint tenancy **after 2 years** .

Read more about [ applying for local authority housing ](/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/) .

##  Getting legal advice

If you are buying (or considering buying) a property with your partner, you
should get legal advice to find the best ownership option for you.

Solicitors' fees can vary considerably so shop around and get some quotes
before deciding who to use. Find [ contact details for solicitors
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/) on the Law Society website.

Contact [ your nearest law centre ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/contact-
us/find-a-law-centre/) for information on Legal Aid. If you are eligible for [
legal aid and advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-
and-legal-aid/) from the Legal Aid Board, you must generally pay a
contribution towards the costs.

[ FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) ](https://www.flac.ie/index.html) is an
independent, voluntary organisation that operates a network of legal advice
clinics throughout the country. These clinics are confidential, free of charge
and open to all. Contact your nearest Citizens Information Centre for
information on FLAC services in your area. FLAC also runs an information and
referral line during office hours for basic legal information.

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

###  Free Legal Advice Centre

85/86 Upper Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 P9Y3  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday to Friday 9.30am – 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 906 1010

**Homepage:** [ http://www.flac.ie ](http://www.flac.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.flac.ie/contact/
](https://www.flac.ie/contact/)

_**Page edited:** 28 June 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Property%20rights%20of%20cohabiting%20couples&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Property%20rights%20of%20cohabiting%20couples&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rights of cohabiting couples (couples living together)_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/)

Couples living together have some rights and obligations, but they do not have
the same rights and obligations as married couples or civil partnerships

2845.3486

  * [ _Inheritance rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

Cohabiting couples have no automatic right to inheritance on the death of
either partner. What are your rights, and find out how you can plan and make
provisions for dependants.

2490.7358

  * [ _Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)

This page explains whether spouses and cohabiting partners have any property
rights following the breakdown of their relationship.

1957.7153

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

