**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > Legal recognition of your preferred gender

#  Legal recognition of your preferred gender

  * Introduction 
  * Changing your gender at age 16 or 17 
  * Applying for a gender recognition certificate 
  * Getting a revised birth certificate 
  * Other supports available 
  * Contact information 

##  Introduction

Since September 2015, trans people in Ireland can apply to have their
preferred gender legally recognised by the State. This is set out in the [
Gender Recognition Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/25/enacted/en/html) .

Anyone over 18 can apply to change their gender. You can also apply if you are
aged 16 or 17, but the process is slightly different and may take longer. If
you are under 16, it is not possible to change your gender that is recognised
by the State.

When you legally change your gender, you are given a gender recognition
certificate. This certificate can also state your new name, if you have chosen
to change it. Read about legally [ changing your name by deed poll
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/changing-your-name/) .

Once you have a gender recognition certificate, you can then apply for a
revised birth certificate.

Legal recognition of your new gender is not retrospective. This means that any
rights, responsibilities and consequences of actions by you before the date of
recognition remain unaffected. In other words, your preferred gender will
start to be legally recognised from the date of recognition, and not before.

###  Before 2015

In 2007, the High Court ruled that Ireland was in breach of the European
Convention on Human Rights in not having a process to legally recognise the
acquired gender of transgender people.

As a result, a Gender Recognition Advisory Group was set up. The group advised
on the legislation required to allow transgender people have their preferred
gender legally recognised.

##  Changing your gender at age 16 or 17

The process for changing your gender depends on your age.

If you are aged 16 or 17, you can ask an adult (normally your parent or
guardian - also referred to as next friend of the child) to apply for a
**gender recognition certificate** on your behalf.

First, they will need to apply to the Circuit Family Court to exempt you from
the over-18 age restriction. The Court can grant the exemption if you have:

  1. The consent of a parent or guardian 
  2. A [ form from your medical practitioner ](https://www.courts.ie/content/certificate-medical-practitioner-s-124-gender-recognition-act-2015-application-gender) certifying that, in their professional medical opinion, you have the maturity and understanding to make this decision for yourself. They must also certify that you have transitioned (or are currently transitioning) into your preferred gender. 
  3. A [ form from a psychiatrist or endocrinologist ](https://www.courts.ie/content/certificate-endocrinologist-or-psychiatrist-section-124-gender-recognition-act-2015-%E2%80%94) certifying that they agree with the medical practitioner. 

If the court grants the exemption, you or the adult can apply for a gender
recognition certificate on your behalf. See _Applying for a gender recognition
certificate_ below for details.

**Note:** In November 2019, the Department of Social Protection [ published a
report ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/69547/?page=1) proposing a [ simplified path
to legal gender recognition ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/43aef0-minister-doherty-publishes-her-report-on-the-review-of-the-
gender-re/) for people aged 16 to 17. The report was published after a [
review of the Gender Recognition Act 2015 (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/69543/0eadce5530df4a558500887e6fa70c2f.pdf#page=1)
. Its recommendations have not yet been passed into law.

##  Applying for a gender recognition certificate

If you want your preferred gender to be legally recognised by the State, you
must apply for a gender recognition certificate. [ Download the application
form, GRC 1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/38300/3f615ebf110d42e8a1b591385bb9dc7d.pdf) .

###  Who can apply?

You can apply for a gender recognition certificate if you are at least 18 and
you are registered in the:

  * Register of Births 
  * Adopted Children Register 
  * Register of Intercountry Adoptions 
  * Foreign Births Register or a foreign births entry book 

You can also apply if you were born outside of Ireland but are [ ordinarily
resident ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-
services#l2b820) here. Evidence of your birth is required.

###  Foreign gender recognition

If you have already changed gender in another country, you can apply for a
gender recognition certificate in Ireland. You must provide a copy of the
relevant decision, order or certificate when submitting your application.

###  If you have changed your name

If you want your gender recognition certificate to be issued in your new name
(a different name to that on your birth certificate), you must provide details
of the forename and surname you wish to use.

**Please note:** The current GRC 1 form states ‘If you wish to have a name
other than that on your original birth certificate shown on the Gender
Recognition Certificate, we require evidence of “use and repute” over two
years or a Deed Poll for a change of name which has been enrolled in the High
Court.’ This form is currently being reviewed. In the meantime, it is **no
longer a requirement** to provide proof that you have used this new name for
over 2 years, or a [ deed poll for a change of name. ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/changing-your-
name/)

###  The application form and other supporting documents

[ Download the Gender Recognition Certificate application form (GRC 1) (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/38300/3f615ebf110d42e8a1b591385bb9dc7d.pdf) .

The application form includes a Statutory Declaration, which must be witnessed
by **either** a:

  * [ Peace Commissioner ](/en/justice/civil-law/peace-commissioners/)
  * [ Notary Public ](/en/justice/civil-law/notaries-public/)
  * [ Commissioner for Oaths ](/en/justice/civil-law/commissioners-for-oaths/)
  * [ Solicitor ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/)

Include the following documents with your application, where applicable:

  * Birth certificate 
  * Adoption certificate 
  * Proof of residency in Ireland, if you were not born in Ireland 

###  Sending your application

There is no charge for a gender recognition certificate.

Send your completed [ application form (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/38300/3f615ebf110d42e8a1b591385bb9dc7d.pdf) and
supporting documents (these will be returned to you) to:

Client Identity Services, Department of Social Protection, Shannon Lodge,
Carrick-on-Shannon, Co Leitrim, N41 KD8.

Find [ further information on applying for a gender recognition certificate
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/b55abf-gender-recognition-certificate/) on
Gov.ie.

Once you get your gender recognition certificate, your gender (and your name,
if you have chosen to change it) will be updated on the Department of Social
Protection’s database. This means that all records associated with your
Personal Public Service (PPS) Number will be updated with your new
information.

##  Getting a revised birth certificate

When you get your gender recognition certificate, you can then apply for a
revised birth certificate if you are registered in either:

  * The Register of Births 
  * The Adopted Children Register 
  * The Register of Intercountry adoptions 
  * The Foreign Births Register 

###  How to apply for a revised birth certificate

How you apply for a revised birth certificate depends on where your birth is
already registered.

If you are registered in the Register of Births or the Adopted Children
Register:

  * You apply to the General Register Office (GRO) to be entered in the register of gender recognition. Your details will already have been sent to the General Registrar. There is no charge. [ Download the application form for entry in the Register of Gender Recognition (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/38318/4131048418b247c3a34efa8c079862e1.pdf#page=1) . 

If you are registered in the Register of Intercountry Adoptions:

  * You apply in writing to the Adoption Authority of Ireland to be entered in the Register of Gender Recognition of Intercountry Adoptions. Your details will already have been sent to the Adoption Authority. [ Download the application form (pdf) ](https://www.aai.gov.ie/images/Forms/Application_for_extract_from_the_Gender_RICA.pdf) . 

If you are registered in the Foreign Births Register or a foreign births entry
book:

  * You apply to the [ Department of Foreign Affairs ](https://www.dfa.ie/citizenship/born-abroad/gender-recognition/) to be entered in the Register of Gender Recognition of Foreign Births. To start your application, [ contact the Department using its online form ](https://www.dfa.ie/citizenship/born-abroad/gender-recognition-contact-form/) . 

###  Getting a copy of your revised birth certificate

You can apply for a certified copy of your entry in the register from the
relevant authority once the relevant authority has registered you in either:

  * The Register of Gender Recognition 
  * The Register of Gender Recognition of Intercountry Adoptions 
  * The Register of Gender Recognition of Foreign Births 

A certified copy of an entry costs €20.

The following people can apply for a copy of your entry in the register:

  * You 
  * Your surviving spouse or civil partner if you have died 
  * Your child if there is no surviving spouse or civil partner 
  * Your parent if there is no surviving spouse, civil partner or child 
  * Your brother or sister if there is no surviving spouse, civil partner, child or parent 

###  Reversal of gender recognition certificate

Where you hold a gender recognition certificate and you want to revert to your
original gender, Section 15 of the Gender Recognition Act 2015 allows you to
apply to revoke your certificate in a similar process as your initial
application for legal recognition of your preferred gender. There is a similar
but more detailed revocation process for those between 16 and 18.

Under Section 14 of the Act, a gender recognition certificate can also be
revoked where information is received that would have led to the refusal of
the certificate, had it been received prior to it being issued.

##  Other supports available

There are a number of services providing information and support to members of
the LGBTI+ community. If you or your child are a member of the LGBTI+
community, or if you are questioning sexuality and gender identity, the
following services may be helpful to you.

###  TENI

[ Transgender Equality Network Ireland (TENI) ](http://www.teni.ie/) aims to
improve conditions and advance the rights and equality of trans people and
their families. Its website includes a wide range of supports and resources
available to trans people throughout Ireland.

###  BeLonG To

BeLonG To is a national support organisation for lesbian, gay, bisexual and
trans (LGBT) young people, aged between 14 and 23, in Ireland. It also offers
advice to parents and carers.

Find information on its services and other supports at [ belongto.org
](https://www.belongto.org/) .

###  LGBT Ireland

[ LGBT Ireland ](https://lgbt.ie/) provides support and training across
Ireland. In addition to running peer groups and local helplines, its website
offers a range of information for all age groups.

You can call their Transgender Family Support Line on 01 907 3707.

Alternatively, you can also call the LGBT helpline on 1800 929 539.

###  GenderEd.ie

[ GenderEd.ie ](https://www.gendered.ie/) is an online education programme
aimed at supporting adult family members of young transgender people in
Ireland. It includes advice on gender identity basics, school and social
settings, legal issues, health and wellbeing, as well as looking ahead to the
future.

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has
also published information on [ LGBTI+ supports
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9bd60-lgbti-supports/) available.

##  Contact information

###  Client Identity Services

Department of Social Protection

Shannon Lodge  
Carrick-on-Shannon  
Co. Leitrim  
N41 KD81

**Tel:** (071) 967 2616 or 0818 927 999

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fd52ab-public-services-card/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fd52ab-public-services-card/)

**Email:** [ CIS@welfare.ie ](mailto:CIS@welfare.ie)

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

###  Adoption Authority of Ireland

Shelbourne House  
Shelbourne Road  
Ballsbridge  
Dublin 4  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 230 9300

**Homepage:** [ https://www.aai.gov.ie/ ](https://www.aai.gov.ie/)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.aai.gov.ie/contact-us.html
](https://www.aai.gov.ie/contact-us.html)

###  Department of Foreign Affairs

80 St. Stephens Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (01) 408 2000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.dfa.ie ](http://www.dfa.ie)

###  Transgender Equality Network Ireland

10 Ellis Quay  
Dublin 7  
D07 DDN0  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 873 3575

**Homepage:** [ http://www.teni.ie/ ](http://www.teni.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@teni.ie ](mailto:info@teni.ie)

###  BeLonG To

Parliament House  
13 Parliament Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 P658  
Ireland

**Tel:** 01 670 6223

**Homepage:** [ http://www.belongto.org/ ](http://www.belongto.org/)

**Email:** [ info@belongto.org ](mailto:info@belongto.org)

_**Page edited:** 7 December 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/legal-recognition-of-preferred-
gender/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Legal%20recognition%20of%20your%20preferred%20gender&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/legal-recognition-of-preferred-
gender/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/legal-recognition-of-preferred-
gender/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Legal%20recognition%20of%20your%20preferred%20gender&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/legal-recognition-of-preferred-
gender/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/)

Information about the functions of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators.
This used to be called the Office of the Taxing Master.

1643.7767

  * [ _Recognition of professional qualifications in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-ireland/)

Outlines how professional qualifications are regulated in Ireland and in the
EU including the following professions: electrician, teacher, architect,
doctor, accountant and more

1462.7178

  * [ _Accommodation Recognition Payment for hosting refugees from Ukraine_ ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-payment/)

The Accommodation Recognition Payment is a monthly payment for people
providing accommodation to people fleeing the conflict in Ukraine.

1264.2432

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

