**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > Breakdown of a marriage or other relationship

#  Breakdown of a marriage or other relationship

  * Introduction 
  * Marital relationships 
  * Civil partnerships 
  * Cohabiting relationships 
  * Parenting alone 
  * Grandparents and grandchildren 
  * Abuse and violence 
  * Child abduction 
  * Legal and other supports 

##  Introduction

The breakdown of a marriage or other relationship is a difficult and traumatic
process. There are many issues to be addressed such as financial support, the
family home and parenting of children. Trying to sort out these issues can be
very stressful. If the relationship has become abusive, you may need to get a
[ safety, protection or barring order ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-
and-protection-orders/) .

##  Marital relationships

If you are married, there are a number of [ legal options following a marital
breakdown ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/legal-
options-following-marital-breakdown/) . The options available are:

  * [ Separation agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/)
  * [ Judicial separation ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/judicial-separation/)
  * [ Divorce ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/)

A court can also grant a [ nullity decree ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/nullity-of-
marriage/) which is a declaration that a valid marriage never existed.

####  **Financial matters**

In a marriage, there is a legal responsibility on both spouses to maintain
each other and any children in accordance with their means. This means that
any settlement agreed or imposed by the court should include a [ maintenance
agreement ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-
orders-and-agreements/) . The issue of what happens to the [ family home
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/) also arises.

Separation or divorce may have tax implications. It is important to understand
the [ different taxation options available ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-
credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-reliefs/) and [ how maintenance
payments affect taxation ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/) . You may need to get specialist tax advice
before entering into arrangements that have [ capital gains tax implications
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-
divorce/) .

####  Children

Married parents are automatically joint guardians of their children.
Separation or divorce does not change this. However, separation and divorce do
have implications for [ custody and access to children ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-and-divorce-children/) .

##  Civil partnerships

The [ options available to those in civil partnerships ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/) where there is a
breakdown in the relationship are similar to those available to married
couples. The courts are able to grant a [ decree of nullity of civil
partnership ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/nullity-of-
civil-partnership/) in broadly the same way as decrees of nullity of marriage
are granted. The courts are also able to [ dissolve civil partnerships
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-
dissolution/) in a similar way to the granting of divorce, but the rules
governing the dissolution of civil partnerships are different.

##  Cohabiting relationships

The [ rights of cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/) are in general
not recognised in Irish law. If the relationship breaks down, this has
important implications for such things as [ property ownership ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-
rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/) . There is a [ redress
scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-
marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/) who
have been in a long-term relationship or who have had children.

####  Children

Where there are children, issues of [ custody ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-of-children-cohabiting-couples/) , [
guardianship ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/guardianship-
and-cohabiting-couples/) and [ access to the children ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-cohabiting-couples/) are
likely to arise. Also, while unmarried parents do not have a financial
responsibility to maintain each other, both parents are responsible for the [
maintenance of their children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/parenting-
alone/maintenance-lone-parents/) .

##  Parenting alone

A separation, divorce or breakdown of a non-marital relationship can result in
a one-parent family. There are [ social welfare payments available to support
lone parents and parents on low-incomes
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/parenting-
alone/parenting-alone/#5e1e47) , as well as organisations offering support.
For example, [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/one-parent-family-payment/) is a payment for men and women who are
bringing children up without the support of a partner. Further information is
available on our page [ Parenting alone ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-alone/) .

##  Grandparents and grandchildren

Grandparents play an important role in their grandchild’s life. However, some
grandparents have difficulty seeing their grandchildren and spending time with
them. They can find themselves excluded from the lives of their grandchildren,
and this can be very upsetting for them and for the children involved. This
can happen for many reasons, for example, if there is a breakdown in the
relationship between the grandparent(s) and parent(s).

Grandparents do not have automatic rights in relation to their grandchildren,
but there are steps you can take to improve your level of contact with them.
Read our page [ Grandparents and grandchildren - your rights explained
](/en/birth-family-relationships/older-people/grandparents-rights/) for more
information.

##  Abuse and violence

If the relationship is abusive or violent, you may need to apply for a [
safety, protection or barring order ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-
in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders/) .
Find information on domestic and sexual violence, as well as information on [
local and national support services
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-
in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-
orders/#c93869) , and [ StillHere.ie ](https://www.stillhere.ie/) .

If you are concerned about violence in your home, you should contact your
local Garda Station. [ Contact details for your local Garda station
](http://www.garda.ie/Stations/Default.aspx) are available on the [ Garda
Síochána ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/)
website. You could also visit [ your family doctor ](/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/) who, apart from dealing with any possible
injuries, can provide information on counselling and other supports.

To apply for a safety or barring order you must go to your local District
Court Office. [ Contact details for your local District Court office
](http://www.courts.ie/offices.nsf/WebCObyJurisdiction?OpenView&Start=1&Count=30&Expand=4#4)
are available from the [ Courts Service ](http://www.courts.ie/) .

##  Child abduction

[ International child abduction ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-
supports-for-children/international-child-abduction/) occurs when a child is
unlawfully removed from a country or unlawfully retained in a country. [
Reunite International ](https://www.reunite.org/) , a UK charity, has child
abduction prevention guides on its website. They give clear and concise
information and practical steps to take if you fear your child is at risk of
being abducted. The guides can help you gather information relating to your
children, as well as information which may be required in the event of an
abduction. The Irish Central Authority for international child abduction is
located within the [ Department of Justice
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/WP15000137) .

##  Legal and other supports

The [ Family Mediation Service ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/) offers a free service to
help separating couples co-operate with each other to work out mutually
acceptable arrangements. Tusla - the Child and Family Agency funds [ voluntary
organisations that provide marriage and relationship counselling
](http://www.tusla.ie/services/family-community-support/counselling/) .

The [ Mediators' Institute of Ireland ](http://www.themii.ie/) can provide a
list of private accredited mediators.

[ Legal aid and advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-
and-legal-aid/) is available from the [ Legal Aid Board ](/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) in family law cases to people who satisfy a
means test and whose case is considered to have merit. If you want to engage
the services of a [ solicitor ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) privately,
the [ Law Society of Ireland ](http://www.lawsociety.ie/) maintains a [ list
of solicitor firms throughout the country ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-
Solicitor/) .

[ FLAC ](http://www.flac.ie/) is an independent, voluntary organisation that
operates a network of legal advice clinics throughout the country. These
clinics are confidential, free of charge and open to all. Contact [ your
nearest Citizens Information Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/)
for information on FLAC services in your area.

_**Page edited:** 14 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Breakdown%20of%20a%20marriage%20or%20other%20relationship&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Breakdown%20of%20a%20marriage%20or%20other%20relationship&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-
relationship/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)

This page explains whether spouses and cohabiting partners have any property
rights following the breakdown of their relationship.

2329.5933

  * [ _Custody of children after relationship breakdown_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-of-children-cohabiting-couples/)

When the parents of a child separate and cannot agree on who should have
custody of the child, the court will decide. Find out about the law regarding
the custody of children of non-marital relationships.

2027.1475

  * [ _Access to children after relationship breakdown_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-cohabiting-couples/)

How to apply for access to children for separating unmarried parents.

1810.4143

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

