**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Before your baby is born ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/) > Becoming a parent

#  Becoming a parent

  * Introduction 
  * Pregnancy 
  * Your employment rights 
  * Registration of birth 
  * Financial support 
  * Childcare 
  * Parenting alone 

##  Introduction

Becoming a parent through birth, adoption, surrogacy, or fostering is a major
event in life. Family life in Ireland has changed significantly and there are
now many different types of parents and many different types of families.

##  Pregnancy

Getting pregnant can be a challenge for some people. Talk to your GP if you
are worried about your fertility. They will be able to offer advice, examine
you and arrange tests if necessary. There are a [ wide range of fertility
treatments ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-
born/fertility-treatments-and-dahr/) available to help you become a parent.
From 25 September 2023, you can get free assisted conception treatment from a
HSE-approved private clinic of your choice. Read more about [ getting IVF and
other specialist treatment through the HSE ](https://www2.hse.ie/pregnancy-
birth/trying-for-a-baby/your-fertility/using-fertility-services/) .

Some people choose [ surrogacy ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-
fostering/surrogacy/) to help them become a parent. Surrogacy is when a woman
carries and gives birth to a baby for another person or couple.

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has
published information on some of the [ services and supports available during
pregnancy, and when you become a new parent or carer
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/05ccf-pregnancy-new-parents-and-carers/) .

###  Pregnancy and birth

If you are pregnant, your first step is to visit your family doctor (GP) and
your doctor will confirm your pregnancy. They can also explain the [ different
types of maternity services ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-
is-born/maternity-services-in-ireland/) available.

If this is an [ unplanned pregnancy ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-pregnancy/) , [ My Options
](http://www.positiveoptions.ie) is a HSE freephone helpline and counselling
service that can provide you with information and support on all your options,
including continued pregnancy supports and abortion services. It also has a
24/7 nursing team who provide post-abortion support and advice.

The [ Maternity and Infant Care Scheme ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/) provides
a programme of care to all expectant mothers [ ordinarily resident
](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) in Ireland.
This is usually provided by your GP and a hospital obstetrician, and is known
as 'combined care'. You are entitled to this service even if you do not have a
medical card or GP visit card. Most women in Ireland choose to give birth in
hospital. You can read more about your [ antenatal care options ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/choices-in-antenatal-care/) ,
including [ home birth ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-
born/home-birth/) .

It is very important to look after your health after giving birth. [ Postnatal
care ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/postnatal-care/)
is available for you and your baby. There are services and supports that can
help if you experience [ postnatal depression ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-depression/) .
You can contact your public health nurse or call your GP anytime to discuss
how you are feeling.

##  Your employment rights

The law in Ireland provides specific protection for pregnant employees.

###  Before your baby is born

You are entitled to paid time-off work to attend any medical visits (also
known as [ antenatal visits or appointments ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/antenatal-visits/) ) associated with
the pregnancy and to attend a certain number of [ antenatal classes
](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/antenatal-classes/)
.

###  After your baby is born

####  **Maternity leave**

You are entitled to 26 weeks of [ maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) , typically
starting 2 weeks before your due date. You may also be entitled to [ Maternity
Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/) if you
have enough social insurance (PRSI) contributions.

####  **Adoptive leave**

If you have become a parent through adoption, you can take [ adoptive leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-
leave/) from employment. If you have enough PRSI contributions you may qualify
for [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-
benefit/) .

####  **Paternity leave**

New parents (other than the mother of the child) are entitled to 2 weeks' [
paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/paternity-leave/) from employment or self-employment in the 6 months
following the birth or adoption of a child. Paternity leave is also available
to same-sex couples. People on paternity leave may get [ Paternity Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/) if they have
enough PRSI contributions.

####  **Parent's leave**

[ Parent’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/parents-leave/) allows working parents spend more time with their
baby or adopted child during the first 2 years. Each parent is entitled to 9
weeks of parent’s leave for a child born or adopted on or after 1 August 2024,
a child who is under the age of 2 on 1 August 2024 or an adopted child who has
been placed with the family less than 2 years on 1 August 2024.

Parent’s leave is available to both employees and people who are self-
employed. [ Parent’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/parents-benefit/) is paid while you are on parent’s leave if you have
enough PRSI contributions.

####  **Parental leave**

When you return to work you may be able to take up to 26 weeks [ parental
leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/parental-leave/) . Parental leave lets parents take time off work to
spend time with their children before they turn 12 years old. Parental leave
is unpaid. Generally, you must have been working for your employer for a year
before you are entitled to take parental leave. Both parents can take parental
leave.

####  **Leave for medical care reasons**

From 3 July 2023, you can take unpaid leave if you need to take time off to
deal with medical care for your child or other relevant person. You can take
up to 5 days leave for medical care in any 12 consecutive months. Read more
about [ unpaid leave for medical care ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/) .

####  **Breastfeeding**

If you are [ breastfeeding
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth_family_relationships/after_your_baby_is_born/breastfeeding.en.html)
when you return to work, you are entitled to take 1 hour off work (with pay)
each day to breastfeed. This applies to anyone in employment who has given
birth within the previous 2 years (104 weeks) who is breastfeeding. Breaks may
be longer and more frequent if agreed between you and your employer. Part-time
workers are also entitled to breastfeeding breaks, calculated on a pro-rata
basis.

###  Childhood health and vaccinations

All children under the age of 6 are entitled to free visits to a participating
GP with a [ GP visit card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-
visit-cards-for-under-8s/) .

Under the [ Childhood Immunisation Programme ](/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/) , all vaccines are
provided free of charge for all children.

###  **Miscarriage and stillbirth**

If you have a [ miscarriage, stillbirth or your baby dies shortly after birth
](/en/birth-family-relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/bereavement-and-
childbirth/) , there are a number of voluntary and community agencies that
offer support. Women in Ireland who have a stillbirth are entitled to full [
maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/maternity-leave/) from employment.

##  Registration of birth

[ You should register the birth of your child ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/) within 3
months of the date of their birth. However, you have up to 12 months to
register the birth. [ You can also register a stillbirth ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering-stillbirth/) . You can
register a birth or a stillbirth in any [ HSE Civil Registration Service
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/find-a-civil-
registration-service/) .

The law in Ireland makes [ presumptions about the paternity ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/presumption-of-paternity/) of
children born to married couples. This means the husband is presumed by law to
be the father of the child and he has automatic guardianship of that child
unless the mother states otherwise. However, the presumption that a woman’s
husband is the father of the child no longer applies if the child is born more
than 10 months after the couple [ separated ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/factors-in-separation-divorce/) .

A father that is not married to the mother of their child is not an automatic
guardian of their own children and they do not have an automatic right to have
their name included on their child's birth certificate. Read more about the [
Guardianship status of fathers ](/en/birth-family-relationships/married-
couples/guardianship-status-of-fathers/) .

##  Financial support

The Department of Social Protection provides social welfare payments to
support families and specifically children. There are many different types of
families and social welfare payments are designed to support those most in
need of financial assistance.

[ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) is
the most common payment to families with children. It is paid for a child aged
under 16. You can get child Benefit for a child aged 16 or 17, if they are in
full-time education or full-time training or have a disability and cannot
support themselves. Child Benefit is not means-tested.

Other [ social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/payments-to-families-and-children/) depend on your family
circumstances and other factors, such as whether you have enough PRSI
contributions or you are on a low income.

##  Childcare

There is a wide range of [ childcare options, ](/en/education/pre-school-
education-and-childcare/your-childcare-options/) including crèches,
childminders, and playgroups. Your choice will depend on what your needs are
and what is available to you.

The [ Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) Scheme ](/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-scheme/)
provides free early childhood care and education for children of pre-school
age during the school year.

The [ National Childcare Scheme (NCS) ](/en/education/pre-school-education-
and-childcare/national-childcare-scheme/) gives financial support towards the
cost of childcare for hours spent outside of pre-school. Children must be
attending a childcare provider (including childminders and school-age
childcare services) registered with [ Tusla – the Child and Family Agency
](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-
child-and-family-agency/) .

The scheme provides 2 types of childcare subsidy for children aged over 6
months (24 weeks) and up to 15 years old:

  * A [ universal subsidy ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/universal-childcare-subsidy/) which is not means tested. The subsidy is deducted from the overall bill that you receive from your childcare service. 
  * An income-assessed subsidy which is means tested. 

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has
published information on the supports available at the different stages [ your
child’s education and childcare
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a669c-early-learning-and-care/) .

##  Parenting alone

If you are or will be [ parenting alone ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-alone/) , you can read more about [
custody ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-of-
children-cohabiting-couples/) , [ access ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-cohabiting-couples/) , [
inheritance ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-
rights-cohabiting-couples/) , [ maintenance ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/) and [
legal guardianship ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-
couples/guardianship-and-cohabiting-couples/) , and the organisations that can
provide information and support.

**Extra supports for parents**

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has
published information for parents, including a directory of the [ services
available to support you and your child
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/49684-supporting-parents/) .

If you are having difficulties, talk to your GP or public health nurse. Being
a parent is not always easy and you may need [ extra support at certain times
](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/parenting-advice/services-
supports/extra-support/) .

Your GP will be able to refer you to supports and services if necessary. Your
public health nurse (PHN) can also help. They can refer you to other sources
of support in your local area, for example, local parenting groups or [ Family
Resource Centres ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/family-community-
support/family-resource-centres/) .

[ Tusla – the Child and Family Agency ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-
agency/) may put you in touch with a social worker if your family needs
additional support. Social workers and family support workers work closely
with parents and children to find out what your family’s needs are, and to
develop a plan to meet those needs.

The HSE has [ further information for parents on mychild.ie
](https://www2.hse.ie/parents/) including where you can get advice, services,
and support.

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/becoming-a-
parent/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Becoming%20a%20parent&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/becoming-a-
parent/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/becoming-a-
parent/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Becoming%20a%20parent&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/becoming-a-
parent/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Parenting alone_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-alone/)

What supports are available for you if you are parenting alone? What are the
legal issues associated with parenting alone?

1037.9701

  * [ _Worksheet: One-Parent Family Payment and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-one-parent-family-payment-and-income-from-work/)

This worksheet shows the effect of income from work on your One-Parent Family
Payment.

1036.4716

  * [ _How parents' income can affect Jobseeker's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-jobseekers-allowance/)

Your parents' income may be taken into account when you apply for Jobseeker's
Allowance. Find out how the ‘benefit and privilege’ you get from living with
your parents is assessed.

1008.5505

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

