**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Children's rights and policy ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/) > UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child

#  UN Convention on the Rights of the Child

  * Introduction 
  * Committee on the Rights of the Child 
  * Third Optional Protocol 
  * The rules for making a complaint 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The [ United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx) sets out the
basic human rights to which every child is entitled. These include:

  * Survival rights such as nutrition, shelter and access to medical services 
  * Development rights such as education, access to information and freedom of thought 
  * Protection rights such as protection from abuse, neglect and exploitation 
  * Participation rights such expression of opinions and taking part in social and cultural activities 

The Convention protects these rights by setting minimum standards that
governments must meet in providing healthcare, education and legal and social
services to children in their countries.

The Convention came into force in September 1990. Ireland ratified the
Convention on 28 September 1992.

In 2002, two Optional Protocols to the Convention came into force:

  * [ Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography ](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/OPSCCRC.aspx) (not yet ratified by Ireland) 
  * [ Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict ](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/OPACCRC.aspx) (ratified by Ireland in 2002) 

Optional Protocols complement and add to existing treaties. They are
‘optional’ because the obligations may be more demanding than those in the
original convention, so countries must independently choose whether or not to
be bound by them.

The Children’s Rights Alliance has published [ a child-friendly booklet
explaining the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (pdf)
](https://www.childrensrights.ie/sites/default/files/submissions_reports/files/UNCRCEnglish_0.pdf)
.

##  Committee on the Rights of the Child

The [ Committee on the Rights of the Child
](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRC/Pages/CRCIntro.aspx) is a United
Nations (UN) body of 18 independent experts that monitors the implementation
of the Convention by the countries that have signed up to it. It also monitors
implementation of the two Optional Protocols.

The countries must submit regular reports to the Committee on how the rights
are being implemented. They must submit an initial report 2 years after
signing up to the Convention, and then periodic reports every 5 years.

The Committee examines each report and addresses its concerns and
recommendations to the country in the form of 'concluding observations'.
Concluding observations include both positive aspects of a country's
implementation of the treaty and areas where further action needs to be taken
by the State.

The Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission (IHREC) [ submitted a report in
2013 to the Committee on the Rights of the Child
](https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CRC%2fC%2fIRL%2f3-4&Lang=en)
about how the rights of children are being implemented in Ireland. The [
Committee issued its concluding observations
](http://docstore.ohchr.org/SelfServices/FilesHandler.ashx?enc=6QkG1d%2FPPRiCAqhKb7yhsvOufvUWRUJlLHiLHKqpXZxUGOtzQF0l%2B37QzAKosbh7yc40d4J3IynFaWf0Egu6J99RK6Y%2FTHjpged5r1H3f3KQIiFieFkoeAPALAwKpbZz)
in 2016.

Ireland submitted its [ most recent periodic report (pdf) in August 2022
](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/09/Ireland-and-the-Rights-of-the-
Child-Final.pdf) with an [ Additional Submission to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child (pdf) ](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/12/IHREC-
Additional-Submission-to-the-CRC-Committee-December-2022.pdf) submitted in
December 2022. The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child published its [
Concluding Observations (pdf) on the combined fifth and sixth periodic reports
of Ireland
](https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/TreatyBodyExternal/DownloadDraft.aspx?key=Z2evgg/KQitPmEcSGMucoCNqFqXtQuuCWER+xgVyHyGmvMw3EsMfzMwfzMf2vQ/fnXOWwkJODlXYvV4TDj8u8A==)
on 7 February 2023.

##  Third Optional Protocol

The [ Optional Protocol on a communications procedure (pdf)
](https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/opiccrc.aspx) came into
effect in Ireland on 24 December 2014.

This Protocol allows individual children, or those acting on their behalf, to
submit complaints about specific violations of their rights under the
Convention and its first two Optional Protocols directly to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child.

A decision by the Committee on a complaint is non-binding (not legally
enforceable) on a country. However, as a party to the UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child, Ireland is answerable to the United Nations for its
implementation of the Convention.

##  The rules for making a complaint

A complaint may be submitted to the Committee by a child (or a group of
children) claiming to be a victim of a violation of the Convention and/or the
Optional Protocols.

A complaint may also be submitted by their designated representative, or by
others acting on behalf of the alleged victim with their permission.

Where there is a concern that the victim’s consent may be the result of
improper pressure or encouragement, the Committee may request additional
information to ensure that the complaint is in the best interests of the
child.

A complaint may also be submitted on behalf of the alleged victim without
their consent. However, in this case, the representative will have to justify
submitting the complaint.

The Committee will not accept a complaint if:

  * It is anonymous 
  * It is not in writing 
  * It constitutes an abuse of the right of submission of such complaints or is incompatible with the provisions of the Convention and/or the Optional Protocols 
  * The same matter has already been examined by the Committee or has been or is being examined under another procedure of international investigation or settlement 
  * All available domestic remedies have not been exhausted unless the application of the remedies is unreasonably prolonged or unlikely to bring effective relief 
  * The complaint is clearly ill-founded or not sufficiently substantiated 
  * The facts that are the subject of the complaint occurred before the Third Protocol came into force for the country concerned, unless those facts continued after that date 
  * The complaint is not submitted within one year after the exhaustion of domestic remedies, except in cases where it can be shown that it was not possible to submit the communication within that time limit 

##  How to make a complaint

Complaints to the Committee on the Rights of the Child should be submitted to
the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The Committee has
prepared a [ sample form for submission of individual communications to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child (pdf)
](https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CRC/ModelCommunicationForm_en.pdf)
under the Optional Protocol on a Communications Procedure explaining the
submission process.

[ Child Rights Connect ](https://www.childrightsconnect.org/) also publishes
information on [ how to make a submission of individual complaint
](https://opic.childrightsconnect.org/what-is-opic/how-to-submit-an-
individual-communication/) .

Information on making a complaint under any of the UN treaty rights such as
the Convention is available on the [ Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights website
](https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/TBPetitions/Pages/IndividualCommunications.aspx#OPIC)
.

##  Further information

###  Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission

16-22 Green Street  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Phone line Mon. to Fri. 10.30am to 12.30pm and 1.45pm to
3.15pm.

**Tel:** (01) 858 9601

**Fax:** (01) 858 9609

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ihrec.ie/ ](http://www.ihrec.ie/)

**Email:** [ publicinfo@ihrec.ie ](mailto:publicinfo@ihrec.ie)

###  Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights

Petitions and Inquiries Section

United Nations Office  
1211 Geneva 10  
Switzerland  

**Fax:** \+ 41 22 917 9022

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx
](http://www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx)

**Email:** [ petitions@ohchr.org ](mailto:petitions@ohchr.org)

###  Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth

Block 1, Miesian Plaza,  
50 – 58 Lower Baggot Street  
Dublin  
D02 XW14

**Tel:** (01) 647 3000

**Fax:** (01) 647 3101

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/dcediy ](https://www.gov.ie/dcediy)

**Email:** [ contact@equality.gov.ie ](mailto:contact@equality.gov.ie)

###  Children's Rights Alliance

7 Red Cow Lane  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 XN29

**Tel:** +353 (01) 902 0494

**Homepage:** [ https://www.childrensrights.ie/
](https://www.childrensrights.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@childrensrights.ie ](mailto:info@childrensrights.ie)

###  Ombudsman for Children

Millennium House  
52-56 Great Strand Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 F5P8  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 865 6800

**Locall:** Freefone 1800 20 20 40

**Homepage:** [ http://www.oco.ie/ ](http://www.oco.ie/)

**Email:** [ oco@oco.ie ](mailto:oco@oco.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-
of-the-child/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=UN%20Convention%20on%20the%20Rights%20of%20the%20Child&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-
of-the-child/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-of-the-
child/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=UN%20Convention%20on%20the%20Rights%20of%20the%20Child&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-
of-the-child/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Convention on the Constitution_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitutional-convention/)

The Constitutional Convention was set up in 2012 to consider possible changes
to the Constitution. Several of its recommendations resulted in constitutional
amendments.

3289.416

  * [ _Fundamental rights under the Irish Constitution_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-rights/)

The Irish Constitution recognises and declares that you have certain
fundamental personal rights. These are confirmed and protected by the
Constitution.

2707.5405

  * [ _Air passenger rights in the European Union_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-eu/)

Find out about your rights when purchasing tickets, reserving flights and
travelling by air with European airlines.

2649.0698

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

