**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Services and supports for children ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/) > Tusla - the Child
and Family Agency

#  Tusla - the Child and Family Agency

  * What is Tusla? 
  * What does Tusla do? 
  * Child welfare and protection services 
  * Educational Welfare Service - Tusla Education Support Service (TESS) 
  * Alternative Care 
  * Early years services 
  * Domestic, sexual and gender-based violence services 
  * Psychological welfare services for children 
  * Family and local community-based supports 
  * More information 

##  What is Tusla?

Tusla - the Child and Family Agency - is a statutory organisation, established
in January 2014 under the [ Child and Family Agency Act 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2013/en/act/pub/0040/index.html) . Under
Section 8 of the Act, it is required to:

  * Support and promote the development, welfare and protection of children, and 
  * Support and encourage the effective functioning of families 

It also provides information and advice to the [ Minister for Children,
Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-children-equality-
disability-integration-and-youth/) on issues relating to its different areas
of responsibility.

##  What does Tusla do?

Tusla has responsibility for the following services:

  * Child welfare and protection services 
  * Educational welfare services (Tusla Education Support Service - TESS) 
  * Alternative care 
  * Early years services 
  * Domestic, sexual and gender-based violence services 
  * Psychological welfare services for children 
  * Family and local community-based supports 

##  Child welfare and protection services

Tusla has responsibility to promote the safety and well-being of children. It
should always be informed when [ a person has reasonable grounds for concern
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/child-protection-welfare/concerns/) that a
child is, or may have been, at risk of being [ abused or neglected
](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/child-
abuse-and-protection/) . Any concern about a potential risk to children posed
by a specific person, even if the children are unidentifiable, should also be
reported.

##  Educational Welfare Service - Tusla Education Support Service (TESS)

[ TESS ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/educational-welfare-services/) has 3
strands that work together with schools, families and other services to
achieve the best educational outcomes for children and young people.

  * [ Educational Welfare Services (EWS) ](https://www.tusla.ie/tess/tess-ews/) work with children and families who have difficulties in relation to school attendance, participation and retention. 
  * The [ School Completion Programme (SCP) ](https://www.tusla.ie/tess/scp/) supports primary and secondary school children and young people who are at risk of early school leaving, or who are out of school and have not successfully transferred to an alternative learning site such as Youthreach, Community Training Centre or employment. 
  * The [ Home School Community Liaison Scheme (HSCL) ](https://www.tusla.ie/tess/hscl/) promotes partnership between parents, teachers and community family support services to improve educational outcomes for children. The scheme also supports families as their children transition from early education to primary school, from primary school to secondary school and finally from secondary school to further and higher education, training or employment. 

##  Alternative Care

Tusla has a statutory responsibility to provide [ Alternative Care Services
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/) such as [ foster care
](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/) or
residential care. It also has a responsibility to provide Aftercare services
for young people that are between 16 and 21 years of age and have spent 12
months in the care of the state between the ages 13 and 18. [ Aftercare
services ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/after-care/what-are-
aftercare-services/) continue to be available for young people up to age 23 in
accredited training or education.

Tusla also provides services for children who are homeless or who are
separated from their families when seeking asylum. Tusla also has
responsibilities with regards to adoption.

##  Early years services

Tusla is responsible for inspecting pre-schools, play groups, day nursery,
cr√®ches, day-care and similar services for children aged 0 to 6 years.

All Tusla registered early years services are inspected. You can ask for a
copy of the latest Tusla inspection report from the service, or you can find [
Tusla inspection reports published online
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/preschool-services/creche-inspection-reports/)
.

##  Domestic, sexual and gender-based violence services

Tusla's [ Domestic, Sexual and Gender Based Violence Services
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/domestic-sexual-gender-based-violence/)
programme funds specialist support services for victims of domestic, sexual
and gender-based violence throughout Ireland. These include refuges and safe
home services providing safe emergency accommodation, community-based domestic
violence services, and rape crisis/sexual violence services.

##  Psychological welfare services for children

Tusla funds a range of national, regional and local [ organisations offering
counselling, psychotherapy and other support services
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/family-community-support/counselling/) .

##  Family and local community-based supports

Tusla provides a range of services that offer advice and support to families.
This includes [ family support workers ](https://www.tusla.ie/familysupport/)
, social workers, youth workers, [ family resource centres
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/family-community-support/family-resource-
centres/find-family-resource-centre/) , support groups and counselling
services.

For more information on Tusla and the different services it provides, go to [
tusla.ie ](https://www.tusla.ie/) .

##  More information

###  Tusla - Child and Family Agency

Brunel Building  
Heuston South Quarter  
Dublin 8  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 771 8500

**Homepage:** [ https://www.tusla.ie/ ](https://www.tusla.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@tusla.ie ](mailto:info@tusla.ie)

_**Page edited:** 1 March 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-
family-agency/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tusla%20-%20the%20Child%20and%20Family%20Agency&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-
family-agency/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-
agency/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tusla%20-%20the%20Child%20and%20Family%20Agency&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-
family-agency/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Children and the criminal justice system_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/)

The Children Act 2001 regulates the treatment of children found in breach of
the criminal law.

1969.4572

  * [ _Children and the care system_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-and-the-care-system/)

Overview of the child care system in Ireland. What are the different types of
court orders?

1875.3862

  * [ _The Ombudsman for Children_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/the-ombudsman-for-children/)

The Ombudsman for Children promotes the rights and welfare of children in
Ireland. The Office of the Ombudsman also investigates complaints regarding
children's rights.

1759.108

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

