**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Parenting alone ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/) > Parenting alone

#  Parenting alone

  * Introduction 
  * Benefits for parents in employment 
  * Social welfare payments 
  * Maintenance 
  * Taxation 
  * Guardianship 
  * Custody and access 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

You may find yourself parenting alone due to a variety of circumstances.

Whatever the reason, there are a range of benefits and entitlements you may be
entitled to, depending on your circumstances. In addition, there are important
legal issues you should be aware of that affect people parenting alone.

##  Benefits for parents in employment

####  Maternity leave and Maternity Benefit

If you are working, no matter how long you have been working, you are entitled
to take [ maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) for a basic period of 26
weeks. At least 2 weeks have to be taken before the end of the week of your
baby's expected birth and at least four weeks after. You may qualify for [
Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-
benefit/) if you are in insurable employment up to the first day of your
maternity leave and you have a certain number of paid PRSI contributions.

####  Additional (unpaid) maternity leave

You can take up to a further 16 weeks’ additional maternity leave immediately
after your maternity leave ends. This additional maternity leave is often
called ‘unpaid maternity leave’ because you are not covered by Maternity
Benefit and your employer does not have to pay you during it. You will get a
social insurance (PRSI) credit for each week of unpaid leave you take.

####  Adoptive leave

[ Adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/adoptive-leave/) provides 24 weeks’ leave from work to one parent of
the adopting couple or a parent who is adopting alone. The 24 weeks start from
the date the child is placed in your care. If you have enough PRSI
contributions, you may be able to get [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/) . It is available to both
employees and self-employed people.

You can take up to 16 additional weeks’ unpaid adoptive leave but you cannot
claim [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-
benefit/) for these extra weeks.

####  Parental leave

When you return to work you may be able to take [ parental leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-
leave/) . Both parents are entitled to take 26 weeks of parental leave for
each eligible child. You must take parental leave before your child’s 12th
birthday. Parental leave is unpaid. Generally, you must have been working for
your employer for a year before you can take parental leave.

####  Parent’s leave and Parent’s Benefit

[ Parent’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/parents-leave/) is a statutory entitlement for working parents. The
paid leave lets parents spend more time with their baby or adopted child
during the first 2 years. [ Parent’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-
and-children/parents-benefit/) is paid while you are on parent’s leave from
work if you have enough social insurance (PRSI) contributions.

From 1 August 2024, Parent's Benefit increases from 7 weeks to 9 weeks. The
extra 2 weeks apply to children who are under the age of 2 on 1 August 2024,
and adoptive children who have been placed with their family for less than 2
years on 1 August 2024.

####  Leave for medical care reasons

Since 3 July 2023, you can take unpaid leave if you need to take time off work
to deal with medical care for your child or other relevant person. You can
take up to 5 days' leave for medical care in any 12 consecutive months. Read
more about [ unpaid leave for medical care ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/) .

####  Death of a parent

Fathers may be entitled to [ maternity leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) or [ adoptive leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/) if the mother dies. The number
of weeks you can take as leave depends on how many weeks after the birth the
mother dies. The leave starts within 7 days of the mother’s death.

If you have not already taken 2 weeks [ paternity leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/) , you can take it at the end
of this maternity leave or adoptive leave.

If the parent entitled to paternity leave dies, the surviving parent may be
able to use their [ paternity leave.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/) If you have enough PRSI
contributions, you may be eligible for [ Paternity Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/paternity-benefit/) .

##  Social welfare payments

If you are parenting alone you may qualify for certain social welfare
payments. Since 4 June 2024, child maintenance payments are not included in
the means test for social assistance payments. However, if you are getting
maintenance that is not child maintenance, this will continue to be means-
tested.

[ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) is
payable for each child under 16 years of age, or under 18 years of age if the
child is in full-time education or has a disability. From 1 May 2024, Child
Benefit is extended to children aged 18 who are in full-time education or who
have a disability until their 19th birthday. Child Benefit is not means-
tested.

[ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) is a means-tested payment for parents who are bringing
children up without the support of a partner. It is payable to a single
parent, a widow/widower/surviving civil partner, a prisoner's spouse/civil
partner, a separated or divorced person, a person whose marriage/civil
partnership has been annulled or whose civil partnership has been dissolved.

Basic [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) is a weekly allowance paid to people who
do not have enough income to meet their needs and the needs of their families.
If you have no income, you may be entitled to the basic Supplementary Welfare
Allowance (SWA). If your weekly income is below the Supplementary Welfare
Allowance rate for your family size, a payment may be made to bring your
income up to the appropriate Supplementary Welfare Allowance rate.

[ Working Family Payment (WFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) is a weekly tax-free payment for employees
with children. It supports people who are on low pay. You must have at least
one child who normally lives with you or who you support financially. You may
be entitled to WFP in addition to your [ One-Parent Family Payment
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) or [
Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Contributory) Pension
](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-
pension/) .

You may be entitled to a [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-
persons-contrib-pension/) if either you or your deceased spouse has enough
PRSI contributions. Under the [ Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-
overview/) , a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension may be
payable if the death was due to an occupational injury or disease or an
accident while travelling directly to or from work.

##  Maintenance

There is a legal responsibility on both spouses to maintain each other and any
dependent children in accordance with their means. Separated or divorced
parents are responsible for the maintenance of their children and may have
maintenance responsibilities in respect of each other, depending on the terms
of the separation or divorce.

Civil partners are also legally obliged to maintain each other and any
dependent children in accordance with their means and may have maintenance
responsibilities in respect of each other if the civil partnership is
dissolved, depending on the terms of the dissolution.

Cohabiting parents do not have a financial responsibility to each other but
both parents have a responsibility for the maintenance of their children. A
cohabitant who is a guardian of their partner’s child, or the child their
partner has the day-to-day care of, has a financial responsibility to the
child.

Since 4 June 2024, child maintenance payments are not included in the means
test for social assistance payments. However, if you are getting maintenance
that is not child maintenance, this will continue to be means-tested. For
example, any spousal maintenance you get will be means-tested.

If a cohabiting relationship ends, you may have a right to maintenance under
the [ redress scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-
for-cohabiting-couples/) .

You can [ find out about maintenance here ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/maintenance-lone-parents/) . There is also
information on [ how maintenance is assessed for social welfare payments
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/) and [ how
maintenance affects your tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/) .

##  Taxation

The [ Single Person Child Carer Credit (SPCCC) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax-credits-and-reliefs/single-person-child-carer-tax-credit/) is a tax credit
for people who are caring for children on their own. It came into effect on 1
January 2014. It replaced the One-Parent Family Tax Credit.

If you are widowed or a surviving civil partner, you can claim an increased
personal tax credit. The amount of the tax credit depends on whether or not
you have dependent children and when your spouse or civil partner died. You
can find out more about [ tax in the year of death and the years following a
death ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-
credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/) .

The Revenue Commissioners have information on the [ tax treatment of widowed
people and surviving civil partners ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/life-events-
and-personal-circumstances/death-and-bereavement/widowed-person-or-surviving-
civil-partner/index.aspx) . Surviving civil partners are treated the same as
widows or widowers for tax purposes.

##  Guardianship

Guardianship rights entitle the parent of a child to make important decisions
regarding that child, for example, decisions about the child's religion,
education, medical treatment and where the child lives. All mothers,
irrespective of whether they are married or unmarried, have automatic
guardianship status in relation to their children, unless they place the child
up for adoption.

Fathers married to the mother of their children also have automatic
guardianship rights. A father, however, who is not married to the mother of
their child or children does not have automatic guardianship rights in
relation to that child or children. Find out [ more about guardianship here
](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/guardianship-and-
cohabiting-couples/) . Mothers who are sole guardians should [ make a will
](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-will/) appointing guardians of their
children in the event of their own death.

###  Temporary guardianship

If you are parenting alone, temporary guardianship allows you to nominate
another adult for a brief period to care for your child should you become
seriously ill and unable to care for your child.

You need to complete a [ special form to nominate a temporary guardian (pdf)
](https://www.treoir.ie/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/nomination-form.pdf) , in
which you can set out your wishes on any limitations on the temporary
guardian. The nominated person must then apply to the District Court if you
cannot carry out your parental role due to serious illness.

###  Kinship care

In some circumstances, grandparents, other relatives or a family friend may
take on the full-time care of children and young people, when parents are not
able to care for them. Sometimes this is called kinship care. Many kinship
care arrangements are informal unlike [ relative foster care ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/) which is a formal
arrangement. Depending on how your kinship family is formed there are
different routes to secure your legal relationship with and responsibility for
the children and young people in your care.

##  Custody and access

Custody refers to the day-to-day care, residency and upbringing of children
who are under the age of 18. The children reside permanently with the parent
who has [ custody ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/custody-
of-children-cohabiting-couples/) and the other parent is granted [ access
](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-
cohabiting-couples/) to the children at agreed times, which can include
overnight access. It is possible for parents to continue to have joint custody
of their children after separation or divorce and for the children to spend an
equal amount of time with each parent if the parents can agree and arrange
this.

[ Access ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-
children-cohabiting-couples/) is the right of a child to maintain direct
contact with the parent that they do not live with. It can include the child
staying overnight either occasionally, on alternate weekends or during school
holidays and for the parent and child going on holidays together.

When the parents of a child separate and they cannot agree on who should have
custody of the child, the court decides. An unmarried mother is sometimes the
sole guardian of a child born outside of marriage. However, it is not
necessary for the father to have guardianship to be able to apply for [ access
](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-
cohabiting-couples/) or [ custody ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-
couples/custody-of-children-cohabiting-couples/) .  

##  Further information

###  One Family

8 Coke Lane  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 662 9212

**Locall:** 0818 66 22 12

**Homepage:** [ https://onefamily.ie/ ](https://onefamily.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@onefamily.ie ](mailto:info@onefamily.ie)

###  Treoir

28 North Great Georges Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (01) 670 0120

**Homepage:** [ http://www.treoir.ie ](http://www.treoir.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.treoir.ie/contact-contact.php
](http://www.treoir.ie/contact-contact.php)

**Email:** [ info@treoir.ie ](mailto:info@treoir.ie)

###  Courts Service

Customer Service

Phoenix House  
15/24 Phoenix Street North  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/ ](https://www.courts.ie/)

**Email:** [ qcso@courts.ie ](mailto:qcso@courts.ie)

###  Kinship Care Ireland

**Tel:** 087 1487124

**Homepage:** [ https://www.kinshipcare.ie ](https://www.kinshipcare.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.kinshipcare.ie/contact/
](https://www.kinshipcare.ie/contact/)

**Email:** [ info@kinshipcare.ie ](mailto:info@kinshipcare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 2 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-
alone/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Parenting%20alone&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-
alone/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-
alone/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Parenting%20alone&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/parenting-alone/parenting-
alone/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Checklist: parenting alone_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/parenting-alone/checklist-parenting-alone/)

Quick links to the main supports, services and entitlements if you are
parenting alone.

2284.8228

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

1456.7064

  * [ _Living Alone Increase_ ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/)

The Living Alone Increase is a supplementary payment for people on social
welfare pensions who are living alone.

1227.0165

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

