**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > After your baby is born

#  After your baby is born

  * Overview 

[ Benefits and entitlements relating to birth and children ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/benefits-and-entitlements-relating-to-
birth/)

There is a range of benefits and entitlements to support women who are having
a baby. This document gives a general overview of these supports.

  * [ Registering the birth of your baby ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/)

Find out how to register the birth of your baby in Ireland and how to get a
copy of a birth certificate.

  * [ Postnatal check-ups for you and your baby ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/postnatal-care/)

Find out what happens at you and your baby's postnatal check-ups, and when
they happen.

  * [ Breastfeeding ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/breastfeeding/)

There are many benefits of breastfeeding for mother and baby. Find out where
to get advice, information and support.

  * [ Maternity care and the public health nurse ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-nurse/)

A description of the postnatal care provided by your public health nurse.

  * [ Supports for postnatal depression ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-postnatal-depression/)

There are supports available for women with postnatal depression. Advice and
contact information to help you through this difficult time.

  * [ Caring for a child with a disability ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/caring-for-a-child-with-a-disability/)

Find out what supports and services are available to parents, guardians and
carers of children with disabilities

**This document is in:** [ Children's health ](/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/)

  * [ Vaccinations for children and young people ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/)

Vaccination and immunisation services for children are free of charge.

**This document is in:** [ Children's health ](/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/)

  * [ Maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/)

All female employees are entitled to maternity leave from work immediately
before and after the birth of their child.

**This document is in:** [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/)

  * [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)

Maternity Benefit is a payment by the Department of Social Protection to women
on maternity leave from work. Find out more about Maternity Benefit and how to
apply.

**This document is in:** [ Families and children ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/)

  * [ Parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/)

The Parental Leave Acts 1998-2019 allow parents to take 26 weeks parental
leave from employment, up until their child’s 12th birthday.

**This document is in:** [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/)

  * [ Paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/)

Paternity leave gives new parents 2 weeks off work in the first 6 months after
the birth or placement in the case of an adoption.

**This document is in:** [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/)

  * [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/)

Paternity Benefit is a payment that is made to a person who is on paternity
leave from work and covered by social insurance (PRSI).

**This document is in:** [ Families and children ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/)

  * [ Parent's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/)

Each parent is entitled to 9 weeks paid parent’s leave during the first 2
years of a child’s life, or in the case of adoption, within 2 years of the
placement of the child with the family.

**This document is in:** [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/)

  * [ Parent's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/)

Parent’s Benefit is a payment for people who are on parent’s leave from work
and covered by social insurance (PRSI). Each parent gets 9 weeks payment in
the first 2 years after the child’s birth or adoption.

**This document is in:** [ Families and children ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/)

  * [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/)

Child Benefit is a monthly payment to all parents or guardians of children
under 16, or under 19 if the child is in full-time education or has a
disability.

**This document is in:** [ Families and children ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/)

###  Most Read in "After your baby is born"

  1. [ Registering the birth of your baby ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/)
  2. [ Benefits and entitlements relating to birth and children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/benefits-and-entitlements-relating-to-birth/)
  3. [ Breastfeeding ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/breastfeeding/)
  4. [ Maternity care and the public health nurse ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-nurse/)
  5. [ Postnatal check-ups for you and your baby ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/postnatal-care/)

