**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Family and Relationships ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ After your baby is born ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/) > Maternity care and the public health
nurse

#  Maternity care and the public health nurse

  * Introduction 
  * What does the public health nurse do after you've had your baby? 
  * How to contact my public health nurse 

##  Introduction

Public health nurses are registered nurses with a specialist nursing
qualification. They provide nursing and midwifery care in the community.

If you have had a home birth, or domino delivery (where your care is provided
by a team of midwives during pregnancy, labour and birth), your midwife will
have already visited you. They will then hand over your care to your public
health nurse.

If you have your baby in hospital, your local public health nurse will be told
about the birth. They will arrange an appointment to visit you at home. This
home visit usually happens within 72 hours after you have been discharged from
hospital.

##  What does the public health nurse do after you've had your baby?

After you have had your baby, your public health nurse will arrange to visit
you at home and:

  * Carry out a neonatal examination (examination of your newborn baby) and also a maternal health assessment (a check-up for you) 
  * Provide you with information and answer any questions you may have about looking after your newborn baby 
  * Provide information on breastfeeding support groups, ‘well baby’ clinics and postnatal support groups in your area. You can have your baby weighed and discuss their progress at these clinics with your public health nurse and with other mums. 

During the visit, the public health nurse will give advice on feeding,
parenting and safe sleep for your baby. They will also give you general tips
about child safety.

###  ‘Heel prick’ test

You will also be offered ‘newborn bloodspot screening’ for your baby by the
midwife or public health nurse to see if they are at risk of a number of rare
conditions. This is also known as the 'heel prick test' and it usually takes
place when your baby is between 3 and 5 days old.

You will be asked for your consent. The test usually takes place in your home.
However, if you remain in hospital longer than 72 hours after the birth of
your baby, it may take place in the hospital.

Read more about [ heel prick screening ](https://www2.hse.ie/screening-and-
vaccinations/heel-prick-screening/heel-prick-screening-what-it-is.html) on the
HSE website.

After the first visit, the public health nurse may visit you again if needed.
The public health nurse is available at your local health centre and will
continue to see you and your baby at intervals over the next 3 and a half
years.

###  Developmental checks

The public health nurse will arrange to check your baby's development at
different stages against a series of "norms" for that age group. For example,
at 9 months, they will check your baby's eyesight and hearing, motor
development, vocalisation and general growth.

Developmental checks are generally carried out at:

  * 3 months 
  * 9-11 months 
  * 18-24 months 
  * 3–3.5 years 
  * 4-5 years (Your child will get this check at school when they are in junior infants) 

You will be contacted by your public health nurse before each check to arrange
a date and time. If you have not heard from the public health nurse, [ call
your local health centre
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/healthcentres/) to make an
appointment. If you are concerned about your baby's development between
checks, contact your public health nurse for advice.

These checks are not mandatory. Examinations of your baby's development by
your public health nurse are provided free of charge.

Read more about [ your child’s developmental checks
](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/checks-milestones/health-checks/) on the
HSE website.

###  Postnatal depression

Postnatal depression affects 10% to 15% of women within the first year of
giving birth. Symptoms of postnatal depression may start as baby blues and
then get worse. The symptoms may take some time to develop. Postnatal
depression may be most obvious when your baby is 4 to 6 months old.

Postnatal depression can have a broad range of symptoms and they can vary in
how severe they are. Find out more about [ the signs and symptoms of postnatal
depression ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/mental-health/postnatal-
depression/postnatal-depression.html) and the [ supports available
](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/supports-for-
postnatal-depression/) .

The most important thing you can do if you think you are experiencing
postnatal depression is [ ask for help
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/mental-health/postnatal-depression/getting-
help.html) . Contact your public health nurse or GP to talk about how you are
feeling and get help and support.

###  MyChild.ie

The HSE’s website [ MyChild.ie ](https://www2.hse.ie/my-child/) has lots of
expert information on all aspects of [ pregnancy and birth
](https://www2.hse.ie/pregnancy/) , [ babies and toddlers
](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-and-toddlers/) and [ being a parent
](https://www2.hse.ie/parents/) . Information on [ parenting and parenting
supports ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/49684-supporting-
parents/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/ea6cd-supporting-children-
and-parents/) is also available from the Department of Children, Equality,
Disability, Integration and Youth.

##  How to contact my public health nurse

You will be automatically contacted by your public health nurse when you get
home following the birth of your baby.

You can also contact your public health nurse through [ your local health
centre ](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/healthcentres/) .

_**Page edited:** 7 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-
nurse/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Maternity%20care%20and%20the%20public%20health%20nurse&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-
nurse/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-
nurse/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Maternity%20care%20and%20the%20public%20health%20nurse&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-
family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-
nurse/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Public health nurses_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/public-health-nurses/)

Public health nurses are employed by Health Service Executive (HSE) Areas to
provide a range of health care services in the community.

2349.034

  * [ _Registration of health and social care professionals_ ](/en/health/health-system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/)

Health and social care professionals are regulated by CORU. There is a process
for making complaints about the fitness to practice of registered
professionals.

1533.7467

  * [ _Maternity and infant care services_ ](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/)

The public health service provides free maternity services for all expectant
mothers for the period of the pregnancy and for 6 weeks after the birth.

1430.9281

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

