**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
goods ](/en/consumer/shopping/) > Guarantees and warranties

#  Guarantees and warranties

  * Introduction 
  * What is a guarantee? 
  * What is a warranty? 
  * Advice on guarantees and warranties 
  * How to use your guarantee orwarranty? 
  * How to complain about a guarantee orwarranty 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

If an item you have bought is faulty, you have the right to return the item to
the retailer and get a repair, replacement or refund. These rights are known
as your statutory rights. Find out more about [ your rights when goods are
faulty ](/en/consumer/shopping/problems-with-faulty-goods/) .

There are some products (for example, electrical, furniture or appliances)
that come with a commercial guarantee or warranty. The terms _guarantee_ and
_warranty_ can often be used interchangeably and it can sometimes be difficult
to know the difference between a guarantee and a warranty.

The main differences are:

  * **Guarantees** are usually free and offered by the manufacturer 
  * **Warranties** usually cost money and may be offered by the shop where you are buying the product 

Your **statutory rights** apply to products you buy. A warranty or guarantee
can give you extra protections but it does not replace [ your statutory
rights. ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/)

##  What is a guarantee?

A guarantee is a written statement provided free of charge by the
manufacturer. It usually includes assurances about the quality of the item, or
service, as well as a promise to provide repair or replacement if something
goes wrong within a set amount of time (for example, within 12 months after
purchase). It is a legally binding document that can be enforceable through
the courts if necessary.

The guarantee should have the following information:

  * What goods the guarantee applies to 
  * The name and address of the person who will honour the guarantee (known as the _guarantor_ ) 
  * How long the guarantee is for 
  * How to make a claim under the guarantee 
  * What action the guarantor will take 
  * If you have to pay any charges for getting the product repaired (such as postage and packaging) 

##  What is a warranty?

A warranty (or extended warranty) may be offered by a retailer at extra cost
and acts as sort of insurance policy. It covers the item or service after the
manufacturer’s guarantee period. Benefits of having a warranty may include
paying some of the cost of a repair if the product breaks or becomes faulty.
Warranties may also offer extra cover for accidental damage.

A warranty is completely optional. You should carefully check what the
warranty covers and whether you really need to buy it.

##  Advice on guarantees and warranties

If a product or service comes with a guarantee, or you are offered a warranty
at extra cost, you should read the terms and conditions carefully to check the
following:

  * If you need to do anything to activate it. For example, you may need to fill out a registration card and send it to the manufacturer to activate a guarantee. Failure to do so may mean that the guarantee is not valid. 
  * What exactly is covered? For example, does it cover parts only, is the cost of labour included, and will you be offered a replacement while the product is being repaired? 
  * Who will be honouring the guarantee or warranty? This may be the seller, manufacturer or a third party. 
  * How do you make a claim? 
  * How long will the cover last? For example, 12 months. 
  * Are there geographical restrictions? For example, if you buy the product in a different country will the warranty cover you for servicing in Ireland. 
  * What will it actually cost for repairs under a warranty and is it worth paying extra for this additional cover? For example: 
    * Is there a certain amount that you must pay, and the balance is covered by the warranty? 
    * Would it be cheaper to repair or replace the item rather than buy an extended warranty? 
    * Is the item already covered under your home insurance? 

You have certain protections under EU Law, including that the terms of a
guarantee or warranty cannot be unfair and go against your statutory consumer
rights. These rules are set out in the [ European Communities (Unfair Terms in
Consumer Contracts) Regulations (S.I. No. 27/1995)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/si/27/made/en/print) . Find out more
about [ unfair contract terms ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/terms-and-
conditions/) .

Always put your guarantee or warranty in a safe place together with
instruction manuals or any other relevant documentation such as proof of
purchase.

##  How to use your guarantee orwarranty?

Remember, a guarantee or warranty is in addition to your statutory rights.
When there is a problem with the product or service you should always raise it
with the seller first. The seller is responsible for resolving the issue under
consumer law.

You are entitled to raise a problem about a product for up to 6 years from the
date of buying it. This applies regardless of the terms of any guarantee or
warranty.

###  Making a claim using a guarantee or warranty

If you want to make a claim using your guarantee or warranty you will usually
need:

  * Proof of purchase (for example a receipt) 
  * Details of what the problem is 
  * A copy of the warranty or guarantee 

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has more information
about [ guarantees and warranties
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/buying-goods/guarantees-and-
warranties/) .

##  How to complain about a guarantee orwarranty

If you are having problems using a guarantee or warranty, you should first
complain to the guarantor (the retailer or the manufacturer). You can get more
advice on [ how to make a complaint ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/how-to-
make-a-complaint/) .

If you cannot resolve the problem directly with the seller or manufacturer or
you are not happy with their response, you can take a claim against the seller
using the [ small claims procedure ](/en/justice/courts-system/small-claims-
court/) .

Use out-of-court procedures such as the [ European Consumer Centre (ECC)
Ireland ](https://www.eccireland.ie/) (for cross-border disputes only) and [
Online Dispute Resolution ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/online-dispute-
resolution/) (for national and cross-border online disputes).

###  If you need more help

If you cannot resolve the problem yourself, you can contact the Competition
and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) for more help.

Find out more about [ consumer protection organisations
](../consumer_laws/consumer_protection_organisations.en.html) .

##  More information

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

###  Courts Service

15-24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 F95Y  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://courts.ie/ ](https://courts.ie/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us
](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)

###  ECC Ireland

Bloom House,  
Railway Street,  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Homepage:** [ http://www.eccireland.ie/ ](http://www.eccireland.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 25 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/guarantees-
and-warranties/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Guarantees%20and%20warranties&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/guarantees-
and-warranties/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/guarantees-
and-warranties/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Guarantees%20and%20warranties&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/guarantees-
and-warranties/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights if you bought in a shop on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-in-a-shop-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something in a shop on
or before 28 November 2022.

1123.9911

  * [ _Your rights if you bought online on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-online-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something online on or
before 28 November 2022.

1055.4766

  * [ _Problem with a service you bought on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/problem-with-a-service-you-bought-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought a service on or before
28 November 2022.

922.02124

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

