**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
digital content and services ](/en/consumer/buying-digital-content-and-
services/) > Your rights when you buy digital content or services

#  Your rights when you buy digital content or services

  * Introduction 
  * What digital content and services are covered? 
  * Before you buy 
  * What you can expect from the digital content or service 
  * Faulty digital content and services 
  * Can the seller change the digital content or service? 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

The [ Consumer Rights Act 2022 (pdf)
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/37/enacted/en/pdf) introduces
new rights when you buy digital content and services. This page explains these
consumer rights. They only apply if you bought digital content or services
**on or after 29 November 2022** . You have different rights if you bought [
on or before 28 November 2022 ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-
before-november-2022/digital-content-or-services-you-bought-before-
november-2022/) .

##  What digital content and services are covered?

Consumer law covers different types of digital content and digital services.

###  Digital content

Digital content covers content supplied by a trader in digital form.

Digital content includes

  * Video files 
  * Audio files 
  * Music files 
  * Digital games 
  * e-books and other e-publications 
  * Computer programs 
  * Applications 

###  Digital services

Digital services are contracts that allow you to create, process, store or
access data in digital form or share data in digital form with other users of
that service.

Digital services covers:

  * Streaming services 
  * Cloud computing 
  * Social media 
  * Video and audio sharing 
  * Other file hosting 

###  Is free digital content covered?

You can either pay a price for the digital content or digital service or
provide personal data to the seller instead of paying a price. This means
certain “free” content or services are also covered.

##  Before you buy

You have a legal right to certain information before you buy digital content
or services, including:

  * The seller’s name, address and phone number 
  * Details about the service (if not already clear) 
  * Total price, or how it will be calculated 
  * Length of the contract (if applicable) 
  * Any extra charges (if applicable) 
  * Your right to cancel (where it applies) 

The information must be clear, easy to understand and given to you before you
buy.

##  What you can expect from the digital content or service

All digital content and services you buy must meet certain conditions of
quality, performance and durability to be _in conformity_ with the contract
you made when you bought it. In conformity means the product or service is as
you expect it would be according to the contract you made with the seller.

Under consumer law all digital content and services you buy must:

  * Be provided by the seller in line with the contract 
  * Work as the seller said they would 
  * Match any advertisement, information, trial version or preview you got 
  * Come with all the accessories and instructions you need 
  * Be installed properly (if installed by the seller) or come with the instructions you need to install it yourself 
  * Include information on any digital and security updates 
  * Be updated in line with the contract 

##  Faulty digital content and services

Under consumer law, the seller must resolve any issue, so the digital content
or service meets what was agreed in the contract.

The seller must correct the issue for free, within a _reasonable_ time and
without significant inconvenience to you. A reasonable time means the shortest
possible time to fix the issue.

Get more information on what to do if you have [ problems with digital content
or services ](/en/consumer/buying-digital-content-and-services/problem-with-
digital-content-or-service/) .

##  Can the seller change the digital content or service?

The seller can change the content or services under the contract if the
following conditions are met:

  * The contract must set out a valid reason for any such change 
  * The change must not cost you anything extra 
  * You must be clearly told about the change 

You must be told in writing before the change about your right to end the
contract for free of charge or to keep the existing content or services.

You have 30 days to end the contract. The 30 days is either the day of
amendment or day you were told about the amendment (whichever date is later).

##  More information

Read more from the CCPC on [ buying digital content and services
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/contracts-and-services/buying-digital-content-
services/) .

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
digital-content-and-services/your-rights-when-you-buy-digital-content-or-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Your%20rights%20when%20you%20buy%20digital%20content%20or%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
digital-content-and-services/your-rights-when-you-buy-digital-content-or-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
digital-content-and-services/your-rights-when-you-buy-digital-content-or-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Your%20rights%20when%20you%20buy%20digital%20content%20or%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
digital-content-and-services/your-rights-when-you-buy-digital-content-or-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights when buying services_ ](/en/consumer/buying-services/your-rights-when-buying-services/)

Find out about the new rights you have when you buy a service under the
Consumer Rights Act 2022.

3678.4658

  * [ _Your rights when you buy a financial product_ ](/en/consumer/financial-products/your-rights-when-buying-financial-products/)

Find out about the rules that banks and other financial services firms must
follow when you buy a financial product.

3063.7488

  * [ _Your rights when you buy in a shop_ ](/en/consumer/shopping/rights-when-buying-in-a-shop/)

Find out about your rights when you buy something in a shop.

2897.0098

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

