**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Utilities
](/en/consumer/utilities/) > Electricity Account Credit

#  Electricity Account Credit

  * Introduction 
  * When will the credits be paid? 
  * Am I eligible for the credit? 
  * I use pre-pay electricity 
  * I have a sub-metered account 
  * Can I use the credit to pay off debt? 
  * Can I use the credit to pay my gas bill? 
  * I am in rented accommodation 
  * What if I switched suppliers? 
  * If I don’t get the credit 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

It was announced in [ Budget 2024 ](/en/money-and-tax/budgets/budget-2024/)
that domestic electricity customers will get €450 off their electricity bills.

The energy credit will be paid in 3 instalments of €150. The payments will be
made in the December 2023, January 2024 and March 2024 billing cycles.

The Commission for the Regulation of Utilities (CRU) is overseeing the scheme.

**Text scam warning**

A [ scam alert ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/7ee5e-how-to-protect-
yourself-against-scams-or-attempted-
fraud/#:~:text=the%20Garda%20website.-,Current%20warnings,not%20to%20click%20on%20the%20link%20or%20enter%20any%20personal%20details.,-What%20to%20do)
has been issued to warn people about receiving text messages that tell them to
click on a link to claim an energy credit. These texts link to a site that
looks like gov.ie.

The Government is not offering any such scheme and people are warned not to
click on the link or enter any personal details.

##  When will the credits be paid?

The payment is automatic, and you do not need to apply for it.

The €450 credit was paid in 3 instalments of €150.

You get:

  * The first credit between 1 December and 31 December 2023 
  * The second credit between 1 January and 29 February 2024 
  * The third credit between 1 March and 30 April 2024 

The date you got your credit depends on the date that your supplier normally
sends you your bill. The credit may not appear on your first bill during these
payment periods, this depends on your individual billing cycle. Suppliers have
information on their websites with the exact dates the credit is shown on
customers’ bills.

You see a ‘credit line’ on your bill in the amount of €137.61 (this is €150
excluding VAT). The total payments are €412.84 across the 3 instalments.

It has the identifier ‘Government Electricity Credit 1, 2 or 3’ or an
abbreviated version of this depending on your supplier (for example Govt.
Credit). It must include “Government”, “Govt” or “Gov” and must state “1”, “2”
or “3” to show which instalment you are getting.

##  Am I eligible for the credit?

You are eligible for the credit if you meet all these criteria:

  * You are registered as either an urban domestic customer (classified as DG1) or a rural domestic customer (classified as DG2) 
  * You are registered with an electricity supplier in the Republic of Ireland and have a unique Meter Point Registration Number (MPRN) – you can find this number on your bill 
  * You do not have a low usage electricity account – see below. 

###  **Low usage threshold**

Properties with very low levels of use will not automatically get the credits.

The low usage threshold is where you use less than 150kWh (kilowatt-hour) of
energy a quarter between 1 July 2022 and 30 June 2023.

The low usage threshold does not apply in the following cases:

  * You are on, or are entitled to be on, the vulnerable customer register 
  * You have a hardship PAYG meter 
  * You have a microgeneration account 

###  **Can I get the credit for my holiday home?**

The credit applies to every domestic electricity account that is not a low
usage account. This means that if you have multiple homes in Ireland with a
domestic electricity account you get the credit for each account, once they
are not a low usage account.

##  I use pre-pay electricity

Your supplier contacts you by text, email or on your top-up note to tell you
the credit has been applied to your account.

Most pre-pay electricity meters accept each of the €150 credits in full.

Your supplier should give you specific instructions on how to redeem your
credits.

###  Hardship meters

If you have an older pre-pay meter that has a pre-pay limit, you may have to
redeem each of your electricity credits over separate top-ups (vends), over
the space of a few days.

To redeem your credits, you pay €10 towards your electricity. Your credit is
automatically added to the top-up. **You should allow one day between each €10
payment.**

**Number of top-ups:** |  **Amount you should pay:** |  **Amount of credit automatically applied to your €10**  
---|---|---  
First top-up  |  €10  |  €50   
Second top-up  |  €10  |  €50   
Third top-up  |  €10  |  €50   
  
You need to repeat the process above for each of the 3 €150 credits.

##  I have a sub-metered account

In the past, households that had electricity supplied through a sub-meter were
not eligible for energy credits. This is where a property is divided with one
main meter and submeters linked to the primary MRPN (for example multi-unit
complexes).

Under a separate new scheme called the [ Submeter Support Scheme
](https://www.cru.ie/consumer-information/government-electricity-costs-
emergency-benefit-scheme-
faqs/#:~:text=I%20have%20a%20sub,your%20electricity%20supplier%20directly.) ,
electricity providers will also provide energy credits to consumers on
submeter accounts. Credits will be paid in 3 instalments of €150.

##  Can I use the credit to pay off debt?

Yes, you can use the credits to pay off any debt you have on your electricity
account.

##  Can I use the credit to pay my gas bill?

The credits can't be used towards your gas bills. The scheme uses domestic
electricity eligibility criteria because not every household has a gas
connection. This way most households get help with their energy bills.

##  I am in rented accommodation

If you are a tenant in rented accommodation and you pay your landlord directly
for your electricity (rather than the electricity provider), your landlord
should pass the credit on to you.

If there is a dispute between you and your landlord, you should try to resolve
this informally. If you cannot come to an agreement, you can contact [ the
RTB’s free mediation service ](https://www.rtb.ie/dispute-resolution-
services/mediation) , where an independent mediator will help you reach an
agreement. Or, you can [ apply for ‘adjudication’ with the RTB
](https://www.rtb.ie/dispute-resolution-services/adjudication) , where an
independent adjudicator will look at all the evidence and make a decision
about your case.

##  What if I switched suppliers?

If you switch electricity supplier, you won’t receive the credit twice.

**You switch between 29 November and 31 December 2023** : The first credit
comes from the supplier you were with on 29 November 2023.

**You switch between 20 December 2023 and 29 February 2024** : The second
credit comes from the supplier you were with on 20 December 2023.

**You switch between 28 February and 31 March 2024** : The third credit comes
from the supplier you were with on 28 February 2024.

A supplier can apply the credit to your closing bill or credit you back
through the same method pay your bills.

##  If I don’t get the credit

Suppliers will have information on their websites with the exact dates the
credit will show on their customers’ bills.

**Bill pay customer:** the first credit will be applied to your account in
December. You should notice the credit on your next bill. Once you receive the
bill, check for the credit. If it’s not there, contact your electricity
supplier.

**Prepay customer:** contact your electricity supplier if you have not
received the first credit by 31 December 2023.

You can find the contact details for your electricity supplier on your most
recent bill or statement.

###  If there is a dispute

If you do not get the credit and want to log an objection with your
electricity supplier, you must do this by 30 June 2024.

If you cannot resolve the issue with your supplier, you can contact the CRU’s
Customer Care Team for help.

You can contact the CRU Customer Care Team on 1800 404 404 or email
customercare@cru.ie.

##  More information

The CRU has [ Frequently Asked Questions ](https://www.cru.ie/consumer-
information/government-electricity-costs-emergency-benefit-scheme-faqs/) about
the electricity account credit.

_**Page edited:** 29 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-
account-credit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Electricity%20Account%20Credit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-
account-credit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-
account-credit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Electricity%20Account%20Credit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-
account-credit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Paying your electricity bills_ ](/en/consumer/utilities/paying-electricity-bill/)

Help with understanding your electricity bill and advice if you are worried
about paying your bill.

1114.8124

  * [ _Electricity: getting connected or switching_ ](/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-services/)

With so many suppliers to choose from, connecting to an electricity provider
can be daunting. This page guides you through the process, and helps you to
avoid any nasty shocks.

1090.3745

  * [ _Income tax credits and reliefs following a death_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/)

An explanation of the tax credits that apply when someone dies and the tax
reliefs for their spouse or civil partner.

760.0059

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

