**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
goods ](/en/consumer/shopping/) > Problems with faulty goods

#  Problems with faulty goods

  * Introduction 
  * If something goes wrong 
  * Short term right to cancel 
  * Right to a repair or replacement 
  * Right to a refund 
  * Right to a price reduction 
  * Right to withhold payment 
  * Faulty gifts 
  * Get more help 

##  Introduction

The [ Consumer Rights Act 2022 (pdf)
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/37/enacted/en/pdf) introduces
new rights when you have a problem with goods you bought in a shop or online.
This page explains these consumer rights. They only apply to goods you bought
**on or** **after 29 November 2022.**

You have different rights if you have a problem with goods you bought [ on or
before 28 November 2022
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-
before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-in-a-shop-before-
november-2022/) .

##  If something goes wrong

If things go wrong, it is always the seller who should put things right. The
seller must resolve any issue, so the product meets what was agreed in the
contract. Read more about what you can expect when you buy goods in a [ shop
](/en/consumer/shopping/rights-when-buying-in-a-shop/) and [ online
](/en/consumer/shopping/shopping-online/) .

If there is an issue with the product, you can either:

  * Ask for the product to be repaired or replaced 
  * End the contract and get a refund 
  * Ask for a price reduction 
  * Withhold a proportionate amount of any outstanding payment 

In most cases, you can decide which of the _remedies_ above you would prefer.

If the fault appears within the first 12 months, it is automatically assumed
the fault was there when you bought it. This means you do not have to prove
anything.

You have 6 years to use your right to the remedies outlined above.

##  Short term right to cancel

You have a legal right to return something faulty if the issue occurs within
30 days. You can return the product and get a full refund.

You must tell the seller you are ending the contract. You can do this verbally
or in writing. You must return the goods to the seller. The seller must cover
the cost of the return. They can ask you to cover the costs of the return
upfront and refund you once they receive your return.

The seller must give you your refund within 14 days. The refund must be in the
same form as the original payment, unless you agree some other method.

The 30-day period is shorter for goods with a short shelf life.

If the issue occurs after 30 days, you can ask for the goods to be repaired or
replaced, ask for a refund or withhold a proportionate amount of any
outstanding payment that you owe.

##  Right to a repair or replacement

If something you bought turns out to be faulty, you can decide to get a repair
or a replacement.

The seller must repair or replace the product for free, within a reasonable
time and without significant inconvenience to you. A reasonable time means the
shortest possible time to fix the issue. For a replacement, you must get the
same or a similar product.

The seller must cover any extra installation costs for the replacement.

If it is not possible or too expensive for the seller to resolve the issue,
you have the right to either a price reduction or refund.

##  Right to a refund

You have the right to end the contract and get a refund where:

  * The seller has not offered a repair or replacement 
  * The fault is serious 
  * The seller cannot fix the issue within a reasonable time 
  * You told the seller you needed the product for a specific date and the seller agreed to this 
  * The same or another issue happens again after the seller repaired or replaced the product 

You also have a legal right to return something faulty if the issue occurs
within 30 days. You can return the product and get a full refund – see ‘short
term right to cancel’ above.

###  What you must do to end the contract

You must tell the seller you are ending the contract. You can do this verbally
or in writing. You must return the goods to the seller. The seller must cover
the cost of the return. They can ask you to cover the costs of the return
upfront and refund you once they receive your return.

Where the content or service contract is terminated, any ancillary contract is
also automatically terminated. For example, if you return a printer and you
also bought ink from the same seller, you will automatically be entitled to
return the ink and get a refund.

###  Getting your refund

The trader must give you your refund within 14 days. The refund must be in the
same form as the original payment unless you agree some other method. For
example, if you originally paid in cash, you can insist on any refund also
being in cash.

##  Right to a price reduction

If you prefer, you can ask for a proportionate reduction in price instead of a
refund. A proportionate reduction in price must reflect the reduced value of
the goods to you.

If the fault is minor, you can only ask for a price reduction. If there is a
dispute, it is up to the trader to prove that the fault is minor.

###  You already paid in full

If you have already fully paid for the goods, the seller must refund you the
difference in price due to the issue. You must get the refund within 14 days
and in the same form as the original payment, unless you agree some other
method.

##  Right to withhold payment

If you have not already fully paid for the goods, you can withhold a
proportionate amount of any outstanding payment. You must tell the seller if
you choose to withhold any payment.

The amount you withhold must match the reduction in value due to the fault.

##  Faulty gifts

If a gift you received is faulty, you have all the same rights and remedies as
the person who bought the product.

##  Get more help

If you want to make a complaint, always approach the seller first, to give
them the chance to put things right.

You can get more advice if you [ want to make a complaint ](/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/how-to-make-a-complaint/) about faulty goods.

###  Take your complaint further

If your complaint is not resolved within a reasonable timeframe or you are not
happy with the response, you can:

  * Use out-of-court procedures such as the [ European Consumer Centres Network ](https://www.eccireland.ie/) (for cross-border disputes only) and [ Online Dispute Resolution ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/) (for national and cross-border online disputes) 
  * Take a claim against the seller using the Small Claims Procedure. For cross-border disputes within the EU, you can use the European [ Small Claims Procedure. ](/en/justice/courts-system/small-claims-court/)
  * Contact the card provider and ask them to reverse the transaction, if you paid by credit or debit card. This is known as chargeback. Some other payment methods also provide protection schemes (for example, [ PayPal buyer protection ](https://www.paypal.com/ie/smarthelp/article/what-is-paypal-buyer-protection-faq1269) ). The CCPC has more information on [ chargeback. ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/credit-cards/disputed-card-transactions-chargeback/)

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) can give you more
information on your rights if you have problems with faulty goods.

Read more about the [ Consumer Rights Act and what it means for you
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/2022/11/28/what-is-the-new-consumer-rights-
act-and-what-does-it-mean-for-me/) on the CCPC website.

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/problems-
with-faulty-goods/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Problems%20with%20faulty%20goods&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/problems-
with-faulty-goods/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/problems-
with-faulty-goods/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Problems%20with%20faulty%20goods&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/problems-
with-faulty-goods/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights if you bought in a shop on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-in-a-shop-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something in a shop on
or before 28 November 2022.

1680.3372

  * [ _Consumer protections for people with mortgage problems_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/)

Mortgage lenders must adhere to codes of conduct when dealing with customers.
Find out more.

1584.1003

  * [ _Your rights if you bought online on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-online-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something online on or
before 28 November 2022.

1557.9119

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

