**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
goods ](/en/consumer/shopping/) > Credit notes

#  Credit notes

  * What is a credit note? 
  * Is it legal for a business to offer me a credit note instead of a refund? 
  * Do I have to accept a credit note or voucher? 
  * Airline credit notes and vouchers 
  * More information 

##  What is a credit note?

A credit note is a paper or electronic note issued by a business to a customer
in place of a refund. A credit note acts like a voucher that can only be used
for the particular shop, chain of shops or business that issued the credit
note.

##  Is it legal for a business to offer me a credit note instead of a refund?

Yes, businesses are legally allowed to **offer** you a credit note in place of
a refund. In some cases a shop may give you a credit note as a goodwill
gesture, for example if you change your mind about something you bought (for
products bought in a shop, you do not have a legal right to a refund because
you change your mind).

However, if you are legally entitled to a refund, then the business cannot
insist that you accept a credit note or voucher instead (except in very
limited cases for package holidays – see below).

In general terms, you have a legal right (also called your _statutory right_ )
to a refund for:

  * Items or services bought online which you cancel or return during the ‘cooling off period’ 
  * Flight cancellations and package holiday cancellations – see more below 

You also have a legal right to certain _remedies_ if a product breaks, is not
fit for purpose or does not do what the advert or seller said it would. A
remedy could be a repair, replacement or a refund.

You can read more in our documents on [ your rights as a consumer in Ireland
](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/) and [ consumer rights in
the EU ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/) .

##  Do I have to accept a credit note or voucher?

In general, you do not have to accept a credit note if your complaint is
covered by consumer law (except in very limited cases for package holidays –
see below). Instead, you can insist on a repair, a replacement or a refund.

If you accept a credit note you may not be able to ask for a refund
afterwards.

##  Airline credit notes and vouchers

Where your flight is cancelled, you are entitled to a choice of:

  * Refund of the cost of your ticket within 7 days or 
  * Re-routing to your final destination at the earliest opportunity or 
  * Re-routing at a later date at your convenience, subject to availability of seats 

A refund in this case means a cash refund (or a refund onto the original
method of payment, where you paid by debit card or credit card or by cheque or
bank order). Airlines can offer a refund by means of a credit note or a
voucher but you do not have to accept this and can insist on getting a full
refund.

These rules are set out in [ EU Regulation 261/2004(pdf)
](http://www.aviationreg.ie/_fileupload/Image/Regulation EC261 2004.pdf) .

##  More information

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has more information
about [ faulty goods ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/faulty-goods/)
and [ changing your mind ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/buying-
goods/changing-your-mind) .

Find out more about [ your rights as a consumer in Ireland
](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/) and [ consumer rights in
the EU. ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/)

_**Page edited:** 3 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/credit-
notes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Credit%20notes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/credit-
notes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/credit-
notes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Credit%20notes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/credit-
notes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your credit history_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-credit-history/)

Your credit history has information about your loans. Find out how to get your
credit report from the Central Credit Register.

912.4164

  * [ _Credit unions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-unions/)

Credit unions are organisations of people that save together and lend to each
other at fair rates of interest.

819.69305

  * [ _Income tax credits and reliefs following a death_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/)

An explanation of the tax credits that apply when someone dies and the tax
reliefs for their spouse or civil partner.

818.58484

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

