**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
goods ](/en/consumer/shopping/) > Your rights when you buy in a shop

#  Your rights when you buy in a shop

  * Introduction 
  * Before you buy 
  * What you can expect from your product 
  * If things go wrong 
  * Returning something you don’t want 
  * How to complain 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

The [ Consumer Rights Act 2022
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/37/enacted/en/html) introduces
new rights when you buy in a shop. This page explains these consumer rights.
They only apply if you bought something in a shop **on or after 29 November
2022.**

You have slightly different rights if you:

  * [ Bought on or before 28 November 2022 ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-in-a-shop-before-november-2022/)
  * [ Bought something online ](/en/consumer/shopping/shopping-online/)

##  Before you buy

You have a legal right to the following information before you buy:

  * The seller’s business name, address and phone number 
  * Product details (if not already clear) 
  * Total price, or how it will be calculated 
  * Length of the contract 
  * Any extra charges, for example, delivery or postal charge 
  * Your right to cancel, where it applies 

The information must be clear, understandable and given to you before you buy.

Sellers must not make false claims that would influence your buying decisions.
A seller who makes a false or misleading claim about a product is committing
an offence and can be prosecuted.

Find out more about [ terms and conditions ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/terms-
and-conditions/) , [ unfair commercial practices
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/consumer_laws/unfair_commercial_practices.en.html)
, [ advertising
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/consumer_laws/advertising.en.html)
and [ pricing ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-
and-promotions/pricing/) .

##  What you can expect from your product

When you buy a product, you make a contract with the seller. The seller must
always provide products in line with the contract.

Under consumer law all products you buy must meet certain conditions. The
product must:

  * Be fit for any purpose you brought to the seller’s attention 
  * Be fit for all purposes which it is normally used for 
  * Have the qualities and features of similar type products 
  * Fit the description, type, quantity and quality agreed in the sales contract 
  * Be durable and of expected quality for normal use 
  * Meet the quality of any sample or model you were shown 
  * Match any advertisement or labelling 
  * Have the necessary functionality, compatibility, interoperability and other agreed features 
  * Come with all accessories mentioned in the sales contract and with the correct instructions 
  * Have the spare parts covered in the contract 
  * Be installed correctly by the seller (if applicable) 
  * Have information on digital updates that support the product, if applicable. You can get updates once or continuously 

You have the same rights when you buy at full price, reduced price (for
example, in a sale) or buy a second-hand good (if bought from a business).

In some cases, you are restricted by a seller’s shop policy or terms and
conditions, for example where you simply change your mind – see ‘Returning
something you don’t want’ below.

Read more about [ your rights as a consumer. ](/en/consumer/consumer-
laws/your-consumer-rights/)

##  If things go wrong

Under [ consumer law ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/) you
are entitled to certain _remedies_ when something you buy does not meet the
conditions outlined earlier – see ‘What you can expect from your product’
above.

A remedy can be a:

  * Repair 
  * Replacement 
  * Refund 
  * Price reduction 
  * Short term right to cancel 

Read more about [ faulty goods ](/en/consumer/shopping/problems-with-faulty-
goods/) and [ guarantees and warranties. ](/en/consumer/shopping/guarantees-
and-warranties/)

##  Returning something you don’t want

You do not have an automatic right to a refund when returning something you
bought in a shop because you have changed your mind.

If there is nothing wrong with the item (for example, there is no fault) you
have no legal right to return the goods. Whether or not you can get your money
back depends on the seller’s returns policy.

However, many sellers voluntarily allow customers to return or replace goods
during a certain time period. The seller may offer a refund, exchange or
credit note as a goodwill gesture. Check what the seller’s returns policy is
before you buy.

If the seller accepts returns, you usually must:

  * Make sure the items are in good condition 
  * Keep the original labels and tags attached 
  * Have proof of purchase (for example, a receipt) 

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has more information
about [ changing your mind. ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/buying-
goods/changing-your-mind)

##  How to complain

You have rights if the seller does not meet their obligations to you.

If things go wrong, follow these steps

  1. Bring the product back to the seller with original packaging (if possible) and proof of purchase such as receipt, bank or credit card statement, or invoice 
  2. Explain what the problem is and how you want it corrected 
  3. If needed, follow up with a written formal complaint 

Get more help if you [ want to complain ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/how-to-
make-a-complaint/) .

##  More information

Read more from the CCPC on [ buying and returning goods
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/buying-goods/buying-and-returning-
goods/) .

You can also read about the [ Consumer Rights Act and what it means for you
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/2022/11/28/what-is-the-new-consumer-rights-
act-and-what-does-it-mean-for-me/) .

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/rights-
when-buying-in-a-shop/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Your%20rights%20when%20you%20buy%20in%20a%20shop&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/rights-
when-buying-in-a-shop/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/rights-
when-buying-in-a-shop/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Your%20rights%20when%20you%20buy%20in%20a%20shop&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/shopping/rights-
when-buying-in-a-shop/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights when buying services_ ](/en/consumer/buying-services/your-rights-when-buying-services/)

Find out about the new rights you have when you buy a service under the
Consumer Rights Act 2022.

2658.5698

  * [ _Your rights when you buy a financial product_ ](/en/consumer/financial-products/your-rights-when-buying-financial-products/)

Find out about the rules that banks and other financial services firms must
follow when you buy a financial product.

2443.0999

  * [ _Your rights if you bought in a shop on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-in-a-shop-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something in a shop on
or before 28 November 2022.

2249.682

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

