**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Phone,
internet, TV and postal services ](/en/consumer/phone-internet-tv-and-postal-
services/) > Phone contracts

#  Phone contracts

  * Introduction 
  * Mobile phone contracts 
  * What information should I get when I sign up to a contract? 
  * Can I cancel my phone contract? 
  * Switching providers 
  * Calling non-geographic numbers (such as 1800 numbers) 
  * Other consumer rights around phone contracts 
  * I am having problems with my phone 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Many companies in Ireland offer telephone services for both fixed line and
mobile. Each of the telephone service providers offers different packages to
consumers. Before entering into a telephone contract, think carefully about
your needs and compare prices and plans.

ComReg's [ price comparison tool ](https://www.comreg.ie/compare/#/services)
allows you to compare mobile phone charges across all operators. It helps you
to select the best mobile phone package for you, based on your individual
usage.

###  What is a fixed line contract?

Fixed line is commonly known as your landline or home telephone. A fixed line
means that your telephone (or the stand for a cordless telephone) is not wire
free but is physically connected to a point on a wall in your home. Many
providers now offer fixed line services as part of a package (also known as a
‘bundle’) along with home internet, and sometimes TV.

###  What are mobile network providers?

Mobile network providers offer a range of plans (with or without a new phone)
that includes a certain amount of calls to other mobiles or landlines, text
messages and data (this allows you to use internet while not connected to
WIFI).

##  Mobile phone contracts

There are 2 main plans that mobile phone providers offer:

**Prepay** : This is a pay-as-you-go option where you buy credit from various
outlets such as shops, bank machines and online and top up your phone when you
need to. Some providers offer prepay options that include calls, texts and
data. You don’t need to sign to a contract and are free to switch networks at
any time.

**Bill pay** : This means that you get a monthly bill for the services you
have used in the previous month and will pay a set price. The duration of the
contract will usually be either month-to-month or 12 to 24 months. If you go
above your allowance of calls, texts and data you will have to pay extra. When
you enter into a bill pay contract, your contract is with the mobile network
provider.

Bill pay plans usually give you the option to either buy a phone outright or
buy it (either free or at a significantly lower price) as part of a bundle.
There is also the option of a SIM-only plan where you don’t need a new phone
and simply sign up to a monthly bill pay contract for calls, texts and data.

###  What’s included in my plan?

This depends on the plan and provider but generally your plan includes:

  * A certain amount of free national calls 
  * A certain amount of calls to particular networks 
  * An allowance for SMS (text message) 
  * An allowance for data usage (usually measured in gigabytes or GB) 

###  What is roaming?

Roaming is using your mobile phone while abroad. In the past, service
providers could charge roaming fees on top of your regular mobile phone bill.

[ EU regulations
](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/QANDA_21_654) mean
that mobile phone customers are charged the same price for calls, texts and
data when travelling in the European Economic Area (EEA), which include all
European Union countries plus Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. You should be
aware that you may still be charged roaming rates for international travel
outside the EEA.

You should also be able to access the same services while travelling in the
EEA as you can at home. For example, if you have 5G in Ireland, you should
have 5G when you travel (if it is available).

ComReg advises you to check with your service provider to confirm your data
allowance before travelling.

ComReg has more [ information about mobile phone roaming
](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/roaming/) and Your Europe has
more information about [ using your mobile phone in the EU
](https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/consumers/internet-telecoms/mobile-
roaming-costs/index_en.htm) .

####  Impact of Brexit on roaming

From 1 January 2021, you are no longer entitled to the same roaming rates
under EU law when travelling to the UK. You should contact your provider to
check the up-to-date prices that apply and what mobile allowances apply when
travelling in the UK.

ComReg has more information about the [ impact of Brexit on mobile roaming
](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/brexit/) .

##  What information should I get when I sign up to a contract?

Providers of fixed or mobile services must give you the following information
in your contract:

  * The name and address of the service provider 
  * Details of the service to be provided, the quality levels and the waiting periods for first-time connections 
  * Details of the pricing and charges (tariffs) 
  * Maintenance service available and if any charges apply 
  * The duration of the contract and how to renew or cancel it 
  * Your right to compensation or refund if service quality levels are not met 
  * Details of the complaint handling procedure 

These consumer rights are set out in the [ European Communities (Electronic
Communications Networks and Services) (Universal Service and Users' Rights)
Regulations 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2011/si/337/made/en/print) .

When you sign up to a new contract, you can only be bound to the contract for
an initial minimum period of 24 months (2 years) or less. You can keep your
existing landline or mobile phone number when switching to a new provider
(known as ‘porting’ or ‘number portability’). Once the contract has been
agreed, the number should be activated within a few hours.

##  Can I cancel my phone contract?

You should check the terms and conditions of your contract to find out what
your cancellation rights are. You may have to pay a fee to cancel a contract.

Your legal right to cancel the contract for free depends on whether you signed
up over the phone, in person, or online.

###  If you signed up over the phone or online

You can cancel the contract if you signed up less than 14 days ago over the
phone or online. This is called a [ ‘cooling-off’ period
](/en/consumer/shopping/shopping-online/) . If you have already used the
service (for example, you made calls on a phone), you are likely to be charged
for what you have used. If you are waiting for a good such as a mobile phone
to be delivered, the cooling off period starts the day you receive it. This is
to allow you time to check if the phone is what you paid for.

If you cancel outside of the cooling off period, you may be charged a penalty
fee or have to pay off the rest of your contract. Check the terms and
conditions of your contract.

###  If you signed up in person

You don’t have the legal right to a 14-day cooling-off period if you signed up
in person, for example you met a salesperson and signed the contract in the
shop premises.

Any costs and charges for cancelling your contract should be made clear in
your contract and at the point of sale.

##  Switching providers

Before switching providers, you should check your previous bills to review how
many minutes and texts you use and how much data you will need.

When comparing providers and plans, you should think about:

  * Discount schemes 
  * Minimum contract period 
  * Penalties for ending the contract early 
  * Charges and fees (can include connection charges, monthly rental fees, call costs, disconnection and reconnection charges) 
  * Price options 
  * Number portability 

For mobile contracts, also think about:

  * Network coverage 
  * Roaming for travel abroad 

ComReg's [ price comparison tool ](https://www.comreg.ie/compare/#/services)
allows you to compare mobile phone charges across all operators. It helps you
to select the optimum mobile phone package, based on your individual usage.

Before you switch, you should contact your existing provider to check if any
cancellation period or penalties apply. You will probably need your Universal
Account Number (UAN) to switch. This is usually displayed on your bill, but if
you can’t find it you should ask your existing provider.

###  Signing up

Once you have compared providers and decided on a plan to suit your needs, you
can sign up to the contract by:

  * Giving your consent over the phone and having that conservation recorded 
  * Signing a customer authorisation form 
  * Filling in an online customer authorisation form 

###  Methods of billing

You can receive your bills electronically (for example, email) or through the
provider’s website. If you are not able to access bills in an electronic
format because of limited access to the internet or other issues, the provider
must give you a paper bill free of charge. You must be told when the bill is
available online (for example, by sending you a text message).

When you switch to a new provider, your first bill may be higher than
expected. This is because you are paying from the date your service was
connected as well as the price plan for the month ahead. You may receive a
single bill for a bundle (home phone, broadband and TV) but if you make calls,
texts or data outside your allocated allowance, you will be charged at a much
higher rate.

ComReg has more information about [ home phone
](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/home-phone/) and [ mobile phone
](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/mobile-phone/) .

##  Calling non-geographic numbers (such as 1800 numbers)

A _non-geographic number_ (NGN) is a type of telephone number that is not
linked to a specific geographic region or ‘area code’. An NGN is any phone
number beginning with 1800 and 0818.

NGNs are used by many businesses and charities, as well as public services and
banking services.

Calls to 1800 numbers from landlines and mobiles are free. Calls to 0818
numbers cost the same as calling a landline number.

If your bundle includes landline calls, then calls to NGNs are included in the
bundle.

###  Changes to NGNs from 31 December 2021

From 31 December 2021, the number of NGNs reduced from 5 to 2. Now, the only
NGNs are:

  * 1800 
  * 0818 

Organisations that previously used 1850, 1890, and 076 numbers have now
changed to either 1800, 0818, or _geographic numbers_ (geographic numbers are
local numbers with an area code, for example 01).

**Why did this change?**

Many people avoided calling 1850, 1890 and 076 numbers because they thought
they were confusing and expensive. ComReg reduced the number of NGNs to
simplify NGNs for consumers.

Since 31 December 2021, there are just 2 NGNs – 1800 (Freephone) and 0818
(Standard rate). This makes call costs easier to understand.

**What happens if I call an expired NGN?**

Since **31 December 2021** , expired NGNs (including 1850, 1890 and 076
numbers) have been withdrawn from service and you cannot use them.

You may hear an audio message telling you the organisation’s new phone number.
If not, you can check their website for contact details.

**Will calls to NGNs be more expensive from 31 December 2021?**

Calls to 1800 numbers are still free from 31 December 2021.

Calls to 0818 numbers still cost the same as calls to landline numbers.

You can read more about [ changes to non-geographic numbers
](https://www.comreg.ie/ngnreview/consumer/#info2) on the ComReg website or [
watch this video about the changes
](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nz5vAf3kqRI) .

##  Other consumer rights around phone contracts

###  General consumer rights

In addition to specific laws covering phone contracts, you also have the
following general consumer rights:

  * Contract terms must be in clear, plain and understandable language and must not put you at an unfair disadvantage. Find out more about [ unfair contract terms ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/terms-and-conditions/) . 
  * Providers are not allowed to use misleading or aggressive commercial practices that are likely to affect your decision to buy. Find out more about [ unfair commercial practices ](/en/consumer/advertising-and-promotions/unfair-sales-practices/) . 
  * If you receive a good (for example, a mobile phone) as part of the contract and it becomes faulty, you can return it to the seller (the mobile phone service provider or retailer) and request a [ repair, replacement or refund ](/en/consumer/shopping/problems-with-faulty-goods/) . 

###  Non-geographic numbers (NGNs)

From 1 December 2019, calls to 1850, 1890, 0818, or 076 NGNs cost no more than
calling a landline number and are included in your bundle of calls, if your
bundle includes landline calls.

Calls to 1800 numbers from both landline and mobile are free. From 1 January
2022, the number of NGNs will be reduced to just 2 (1800 and 0818).

ComReg has more information about [ changes to non-geographic numbers
](https://www.comreg.ie/ngnreview/) .

##  I am having problems with my phone

**Complaint about the service**

If you have a problem with the service (for example, there are network
coverage issues or you wish to dispute a charge on your bill) or the contract,
you should first contact your service provider to try sort out the issue.

The consumer information section of comreg.ie has advice on the following
topics:

  * **Billing and disputed charges** \- [ home phone ](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/home-phone/billing-and-disputed-charges/) and [ mobile phone ](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/mobile-phone/billing-and-disputed-charges/)
  * **Switching providers** \- [ home phone ](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/home-phone/switching-providers/) and [ mobile phone ](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/mobile-phone/switching-providers/)
  * **Service issues** \- home phone and [ mobile phone ](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/mobile-phone/service-issues/)

If you cannot sort out the problem informally, you can put your complaint in
writing to the phone service provider.

If you are not satisfied with the response from the provider, you can then
contact ComReg for more advice and help.

You can talk to a member of ComReg’s customer care team about your query by:

  * **Text** – send a text with the word COMREG to 51500 (standard SMS rates apply) to receive a call back from the customer care team 
  * **Live web chat**
  * **Online form**
  * **Phone** on 01 8049668 
  * **Irish sign language** through the Consumer Line at [ consumerline@comreg.ie ](mailto:consumerline@comreg.ie) or SLIS at [ bookings@slis.ie ](mailto:bookings@slis.ie) and an appointment will be arranged 

ComReg cannot act on your complaint until you have raised it with your service
provider and their complaint handling process is completed.

###  Complaint about faulty phone

If the complaint relates to the device itself, for example the mobile phone is
faulty, then you should contact the seller (mobile service provider or a
retailer). If the phone fails to meet a statutory quality standard, you have
the right to ask for a [ repair, replacement or refund
](/en/consumer/shopping/problems-with-faulty-goods/) .

If you cannot sort out the problem informally, you can put your complaint in
writing to the seller.

If you are not happy with the response you get, you can contact the
Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) for more advice about
your consumer rights.

Find out more about how to [ complain about phone, TV and internet
](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-phone-internet-and-tv/) .

##  Further information

ComReg has detailed information on a range of topics about [ home and mobile
phone contracts ](https://www.comreg.ie/consumer-information/) .

The CCPC has more advice about [ mobile phones contracts
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/contracts-and-services/mobile-phones) .

You can find information about fixed line telephone services and your EU
rights at [ Your Europe
](https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/consumers/internet-
telecoms/telecommunication-services/index_en.htm#shortcut-2) .

###  Commission for Communications Regulation

One Dockland Central  
1 Guild Street  
North Dock  
Dublin 1  
D01 E4XO  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 804 9668

**Fax:** (01) 804 9680

**Homepage:** [ http://www.comreg.ie/ ](http://www.comreg.ie/)

**Email:** [ consumerline@comreg.ie ](mailto:consumerline@comreg.ie)

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

_**Page edited:** 1 July 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/phone-
contracts/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Phone%20contracts&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/phone-
contracts/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/phone-
contracts/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Phone%20contracts&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/phone-contracts/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Complain about phone, internet and TV_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-phone-internet-and-tv/)

Find out how to complain to a telecommunications service provider or ComReg
about phone, internet or TV.

1599.9113

  * [ _Premium rate phone and text services_ ](/en/consumer/phone-internet-tv-and-postal-services/premium-rate-telephone-services/)

Premium rate phone and text services in Ireland are regulated. Find out how
your rights are protected when using premium rate services.

1357.6393

  * [ _Zero-hours contracts_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/zero-hours-contracts/)

Zero-hours contracts are banned in most cases.

1134.1257

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

