**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ How to
complain ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/) > Online Dispute Resolution (ODR)

#  Online Dispute Resolution (ODR)

  * What is ODR? 
  * Make a complaint using ODR 
  * Does the business have to participate? 
  * More information 

##  What is ODR?

Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) is a type of [ alternative dispute resolution
(ADR) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-
complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/) process for online shopping.

ADR is a way to resolve complaints without having to go to court. ADR is where
an independent third party helps you to resolve an ongoing dispute with a
business using mediation, conciliation or arbitration.

ODR is conducted entirely online. It is available for online sales in Ireland
and the EU. It is particularly useful when you and the business are in
different countries.

###  The ODR platform

The [ ODR platform
](https://ec.europa.eu/consumers/odr/main/index.cfm?event=main.home2.show&lng=EN)
is a free online tool to allow you to make a complaint about products or
services you bought online.

The platform is provided by the European Commission and aims to make cross-
border online disputes easier to solve.

##  Make a complaint using ODR

You can use the ODR platform to:

  * Contact the business to solve your problem directly 
  * Use a dispute resolution body 

###  Complete the online form

To create a complaint, fill in the [ online complaint form.
](https://ec.europa.eu/consumers/odr/main/?event=main.home.selfTest)

You can create an ODR account or sign into your existing account, or create a
complaint without registering but you will need to register later on.

You first need to go through some screening questions.

Then you are asked to enter a few details about yourself, the business, your
purchase and what your complaint is about. Explain what your preferred
solution would be.

Upload any relevant documents (for example an invoice or order confirmation).

###  Contact the business

As part of the online complaint form, you ask to talk with the business
directly.

The platform notifies the business of your request.

If the business is willing to talk, you will be able to exchange messages
directly through the ODR dashboard.

You have 90 days to reach an agreement through direct talks.

If the business has not engaged with the process within 30 days, the case will
be closed.

###  Use a dispute resolution body

If the business does not want to resolve the problem with you directly on the
platform, they can suggest a list of ADR bodies to use instead.

You have 30 days to agree on which body to use or your case will be closed.

If you agree to one of the ADR bodies suggested by the company, you confirm
this on the platform.

Your dispute will automatically be transferred to the ADR body for
consideration.

The ADR body will handle the complaint online and will have 90 days to make
their decision.

Either you or the business can withdraw from the process at any time.

##  Does the business have to participate?

In most cases, companies do not have to participate in ADR schemes.

However, all companies who sell products or services online in the EU must
include the following on their website:

  * A link to the [ ODR platform ](https://ec.europa.eu/consumers/odr/main/index.cfm?event=main.home2.show&lng=EN)
  * An email address for a point of contact for consumer complaints 

##  More information

Read more about [ Alternative Dispute Resolution
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-complain/alternative-
dispute-resolution/) .

ECC Ireland has more information about [ online dispute resolution
](https://www.eccireland.ie/take-action/alternative-dispute-
resolution/#:~:text=Online%20Dispute%20Resolution%20\(ODR\)%20is,bodies%20listed%20on%20the%20platform.)
.

###  ECC Ireland

Bloom House,  
Railway Street,  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Homepage:** [ http://www.eccireland.ie/ ](http://www.eccireland.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 7 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Online%20Dispute%20Resolution%20%28ODR%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-
complain/online-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Online%20Dispute%20Resolution%20%28ODR%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Alternative Dispute Resolution_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/)

You may be able to resolve a dispute with a company more easily and without
having to go to court using alternative dispute resolution (ADR). Find out
what ADR is and how it might be useful for you.

2588.6753

  * [ _Your online shopping rights_ ](/en/consumer/shopping/shopping-online/)

You have strong consumer righrs when you shop online. Find out more about your
online shopping rights.

1331.4604

  * [ _Disputes about equality and discrimination_ ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/disputes-about-equality-and-discrimination/)

The Workplace Relations Commission deals with all complaints of discrimination
in employment and access to goods and services which come under equality
legislation.

1216.396

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

