**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ How to
complain ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/) > Alternative Dispute Resolution

#  Alternative Dispute Resolution

  * Introduction 
  * How does ADR work? 
  * What are the benefits of using ADR? 
  * What are the main types of ADR organisations? 
  * Using ADR to resolve cross-border disputes 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you have a dispute with a company in Ireland or elsewhere in the EU you
should first try to solve the problem directly with the company.

If this fails, you may take your case to court. [ The Small Claims Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/small-claims-court/) is particularly useful for
claims worth under €2,000.

Another option is to use alternative dispute resolution (ADR). Some businesses
belong to an ADR scheme that can help you solve your problem without having to
go to court.

The term ADR covers a wide variety of processes aimed at resolving disputes
out-of-court. They include mediation, arbitration and conciliation. The
process involves an independent third party helping you and the business to
reach a resolution on your dispute.

Organisations that provide alternative ways of resolving serious disputes are
called alternative dispute resolution (ADR) organisations.

###  EU Directive on alternative dispute resolution

The right to access alternative dispute resolution processes for consumer
disputes is part of EU law. The [ Competition and Consumer Protection
Commission (CCPC) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/) is responsible for approving
organisations and agencies as _notified_ or authorised ADR bodies. It keeps a
public list of [ authorised ADR bodies ](https://www.ccpc.ie/business/help-
for-business/alternative-dispute-resolution/) .

By law, authorised ADR bodies have to meet strict EU quality criteria which
guarantee that they handle your complaint in an effective, fair, independent
and transparent way.

There are also other organisations that provide informal alternative
resolution services but are not listed as authorised ADR bodies with the CCPC.
It is voluntary for organisations to go through this approval process.

The EU Directive on ADR was brought into Irish law by the [ EU Alternative
Dispute Resolution for Consumer Disputes) Regulations 2015 (SI 343/2015)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/si/343/made/en/print) .

##  How does ADR work?

The main aim of ADR organisations is to facilitate communication between you
and the trader to help find a solution to the problem that is agreeable to
both sides. Some ADR organisation can only propose a solution, while others
have the power to impose a decision or ruling.

###  What types of disputes can ADR organisations deal with?

Alternative dispute resolution organisations can deal with disputes from both
consumers and businesses.

###  Do the parties have to participate in ADR?

It is your own personal choice whether you want to use ADR to resolve a
dispute with a business. You do not have to use ADR and have the right to take
legal action instead. A court will usually require you to show that you have
tried to resolve the issue before taking legal action. You can find out more
about the [ small claims procedure ](/en/justice/courts-system/small-claims-
court/) and [ taking a civil case ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-
appealing-a-civil-case/) .

In most cases, participation in ADR schemes is not mandatory for companies.
However, any business who commit to using, or are legally obliged to use an
ADR entity must point you to the name and website of the relevant ADR scheme.

There are some sectors where the trader must use a certain form of ADR. For
example, you have a legal right to bring a complaint about financial services
company to the [ Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman (FSPO) ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/) . There are
trade associations that make it mandatory for their members to use a
particular ADR process, for example the [ Royal Institute of the Architects of
Ireland (RIAI) ](https://www.riai.ie/) .

###  Are all ADR decisions legally binding?

This depends whether you use mediation or arbitration:

  * **Mediation:** The mediator can propose a solution but has no decision making power. You and the company you are in a dispute with will decide on the outcome, instead of having it imposed on you. 
  * **Arbitration:** Decisions of the arbitrator are final and _legally binding_ . This means that the decision puts a legal requirement on the retailer or you to act in a certain way. This could be to repay the money, to fix the item or to return the item, and so on. You or the company can only appeal the final decision under limited circumstances. If the outcome of this decision is legally binding on either party, you may not then be able to take the case to court. 

##  What are the benefits of using ADR?

The main benefits of ADR are:

  * It is easy to use 
  * Can help solve a problem faster 
  * Usually ADR costs less than going to court 
  * Can be confidential 
  * Can be flexible and provide a range of solutions and outcomes 
  * Helps achieve mutual agreement, that is a solution that both parties are happy with 

ADR may not be suitable in some situations, including when:

  * The outcome needs to be legally binding 
  * The other party is unwilling to take part in ADR 

##  What are the main types of ADR organisations?

There is a whole range of organisations and agencies that can help you defend
your consumer rights in Ireland and within the EU. Some organisations have a
number of functions as well as dealing with complaints from consumers.

There are 4 main types of ADR organisations in Ireland:

  * Ombudsmen 
  * Regulators 
  * Trade associations or professional bodies 
  * Commissions and commissioners 

###  Ombudsmen

There are Ombudsman schemes that cover many different services such as
financial or utilities as well as organisations such as public authorities. If
you have already gone through the trader’s internal complaints process and the
issue is still not resolved, you may be able to use an Ombudsman if you feel
you have been unfairly treated or that your consumer rights have been
breached.

Ombudsman schemes can use more informal methods to resolve a complaint
including conciliation or mediation. In other cases, it may start a formal
investigation and issue a recommendation or ruling. Some decisions can be
legally binding.

There are a number of Ombudsmen schemes available, including:

  * [ The Ombudsman for Children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/the-ombudsman-for-children/) – for complaints made by children or on behalf of children against certain public bodies such as schools or hospitals 
  * [ The Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman (FSPO) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/) – for complaints about financial service providers 
  * [ The Office of the Ombudsman ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/) – for complaints about public service organisations such as government departments, local authorities and the Health Services Executive 
  * [ Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission (GSOC) ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-ombudsman-commission/) – for complaints about the conduct of gardaí 
  * [ Press ombudsman ](https://www.presscouncil.ie/) – for complaints about the media 
  * [ The European Ombudsman ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-ombudsman/) – for complaints about any of the EU institutions (for example, the European Commission, the European Parliament and the Court of Justice) 

The Office of the Ombudsman has a useful guide on [ Ombudsman Offices in
Ireland (pdf) ](https://www.ombudsman.ie/making-a-complaint/if-we-cant-
help/Ombudsman-Offices-in-Ireland-\(Web-Eng-A4\).pdf) . It can help you
identify the correct ombudsman to deal with your complaint.

###  Regulators

Regulators are bodies set up by law to oversee specific sectors to make sure
they comply with the law. In Ireland, there are regulators looking after
utilities and financial services.

For example, [ ComReg ](https://www.comreg.ie/) regulates the
telecommunications and postal sector, the [ Commission for Regulation of
Utilities ](https://www.cru.ie/) regulates the gas, electricity and water
suppliers and the [ Central Bank ](https://www.centralbank.ie/) regulates the
financial services sector.

You can find out more about [ consumer protection organisations
](/consumer/how_to_complain/consumer_protection_organisations.html ) .

###  Trade associations and professional bodies

Trade associations or professional bodies represent members of a particular
industry or sector. Many have codes of practices that members have to follow.
Members who don’t keep to the code rules can have their membership removed,
their ability to practice restricted or they can be fined. You can find out
more about [ how to complain about a professional ](/en/consumer/how-to-
complain/) .

Examples of trade associations or professional bodies are the [ Law Society
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/) , the [ Register of Electrical Contractors of
Ireland ](https://safeelectric.ie/) and the [ Advertising Standards
Association for Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer_affairs/consumer_protection/consumer_rights/advertising_standards_authority_for_ireland.html)
.

###  Commissions

Commissions and commissioners are generally statutory bodies set up to ensure
your rights according to specific legislation. In Ireland, these include the:

  * [ Data Protection Commission ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/national_government/standards_and_accountability/data_protection.html) – enforces data protection laws 
  * [ Information Commissioner ](https://www.oic.ie/) \- oversees Ireland’s Freedom of Information laws 
  * [ Irish Aviation Authority ](https://www.aviationreg.ie/) – enforces certain air passenger rights 
  * [ Workplace Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-relations-commission/) – monitors compliance with employment rights 

##  Using ADR to resolve cross-border disputes

Irish consumers can use ADR schemes to settle disputes with traders based
elsewhere in the EU.

You can [ submit a complaint ](https://www.eccireland.ie/submit-a-complaint/)
to the European Consumer Centre (ECC) Ireland, if you have tried to resolve
the issue with the business directly but have been unsuccessful.

If you cannot resolve a problem with a trader based in another EU country and
you bought online, you can use [ online dispute resolution ](/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/) .

You can find out more about your [ consumer rights in the EU
](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/) .

##  Further information

You can find out more about [ how to make a consumer complaint
](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/how-to-make-a-complaint/) . Your Europe also
has information about [ out-of-court procedures for consumers
](https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/consumers/consumers-dispute-
resolution/out-of-court-procedures/index_en.htm) .

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

###  Ombudsman for Children

Millennium House  
52-56 Great Strand Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 F5P8  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 865 6800

**Locall:** Freefone 1800 20 20 40

**Homepage:** [ http://www.oco.ie/ ](http://www.oco.ie/)

**Email:** [ oco@oco.ie ](mailto:oco@oco.ie)

###  Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman

3rd Floor  
Lincoln House  
Lincoln Place  
Dublin 2  
D02 VH29  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 567 7000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fspo.ie/ ](http://www.fspo.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@fspo.ie ](mailto:info@fspo.ie)

###  Office of the Ombudsman

6 Earlsfort Terrace  
Dublin 2  
D02 W773  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 639 5600

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ombudsman.ie/ ](https://www.ombudsman.ie/)

###  Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission

150 Upper Abbey Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 FT73  
Ireland

**Locall:** 0818 600 800

**Fax:** (01) 814 7023

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gardaombudsman.ie/ ](http://www.gardaombudsman.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@gsoc.ie ](mailto:info@gsoc.ie)

###  Office of the Press Ombudsman

3 Westland Square  
Pearse Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 N567

**Locall:** 1890 208 080

**Fax:** (01) 674 0046

**Homepage:** [ http://www.pressombudsman.ie ](http://www.pressombudsman.ie)

**Email:** [ info@pressombudsman.ie ](mailto:info@pressombudsman.ie)

###  The European Ombudsman

1 Avenue de Président Robert Schuman  
CS 30403  
F-67001 Strasbourg Cedex  
France

**Tel:** +33 3 88172313

**Fax:** +33 3 88179062

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu
](http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/shortcuts/contacts.faces
](http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/shortcuts/contacts.faces)

###  Data Protection Commission

21 Fitzwilliam Square South,  
Dublin 2,  
D02 RD28  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 09:30 – 17:30, Monday–Friday (closed 13:00-14:00)

**Tel:** 01 765 0100 or 1800 437 737

**Homepage:** [ http://www.dataprotection.ie ](http://www.dataprotection.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://forms.dataprotection.ie/contact
](https://forms.dataprotection.ie/contact)

**Email:** [ info@dataprotection.ie ](mailto:info@dataprotection.ie)

###  Office of the Information Commissioner

6 Earlsfort Terrace  
Dublin 2  
D02 W773  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 9.15 am to 5 pm, Monday to Friday

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 639 5689

**Homepage:** [ http://www.oic.ie ](http://www.oic.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.oic.ie/contact/ ](http://www.oic.ie/contact/)

**Email:** [ info@oic.ie ](mailto:info@oic.ie)

###  Irish Aviation Authority

The Times Building  
11-12 D'Olier Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 603 1100

**Homepage:** [ https://www.iaa.ie/ ](https://www.iaa.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@iaa.ie ](mailto:info@iaa.ie)

###  Commission for Communications Regulation

One Dockland Central  
1 Guild Street  
North Dock  
Dublin 1  
D01 E4XO  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 804 9668

**Fax:** (01) 804 9680

**Homepage:** [ http://www.comreg.ie/ ](http://www.comreg.ie/)

**Email:** [ consumerline@comreg.ie ](mailto:consumerline@comreg.ie)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

###  ECC Ireland

Bloom House,  
Railway Street,  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Homepage:** [ http://www.eccireland.ie/ ](http://www.eccireland.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 29 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Alternative%20Dispute%20Resolution&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-
complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Alternative%20Dispute%20Resolution&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Online Dispute Resolution (ODR)_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/)

Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) is a type of alternative dispute resolution
for problems related to online shopping.

1853.9595

  * [ _Resolving disputes between landlords and tenants_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/)

The Residential Tenancies Board provides a dispute resolution service for
landlords and tenants in private rented accommodation and approved housing
body tenancies.

1677.8221

  * [ _Disputes about equality and discrimination_ ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/disputes-about-equality-and-discrimination/)

The Workplace Relations Commission deals with all complaints of discrimination
in employment and access to goods and services which come under equality
legislation.

1479.1578

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

