**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Utilities
](/en/consumer/utilities/) > Paying your gas bills

#  Paying your gas bills

  * Introduction 
  * If you are struggling to pay your bills 
  * Getting a meter reading 
  * Understanding your bill 
  * How to use less energy 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

When you sign up to a gas supplier, you should get regular and accurate bills.
Suppliers must give you a range of options for paying your bills.

Increases in energy costs have had a big impact on the [ cost of living
](/en/money-and-tax/cost-of-living/help-with-cost-of-living/) for households.
If you are worried about paying your gas bills, help is available. You can
contact your energy supplier to explore payment options or contact MABS for
help and advice.

##  If you are struggling to pay your bills

Help is available if you are worried about paying your gas bills.

You can:

  * Make an appointment for free confidential advice with the [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) ](https://www.mabs.ie/en/)
  * Contact your supplier to discuss payment options 
  * Contact your local Citizens Information Service 

Your gas supply could be cut off if you do not pay your bills. MABS has more
advice if you have [ problems paying your bills ](https://mabs.ie/tackling-
debt/problems-paying-your-bills/) .

###  B **an on disconnections during winter**

Customers having problems paying their bills [ cannot be disconnected
](https://www.cru.ie/about-us/news/cru-publishes-updated-customer-protection-
measures-for-winter-2425/) during the winter months.

For the coming winter period, this is from:

  * 1 November 2024 to 31 March 2025, for vulnerable customers 
  * 9 December 2024 to 17 January 2025, for all other domestic customers 

###  Alternative payments plans

The supplier can agree to put an alternative payment plan in place for you.
Suppliers must help you if you are in genuine financial difficulty. They must
make at least 4 attempts to contact you before they disconnect your gas.

###  Claiming social welfare

####  Household Benefits package

If you are over 70, you can get the electricity allowance as part of the [
Household Benefits package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/household-benefits-package/) . Some people under 70 may also qualify
if they meet certain criteria. The allowance is paid either as a monthly
credit on a customer's bill or directly to the customer.

####  Fuel Allowance

You can get [ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/fuel-allowance/) if you are getting certain social welfare payments
and satisfy the other conditions of the scheme. If you are 70 or over, you
don’t need a qualifying payment to qualify for Fuel Allowance.

This year, extra once off payments of Fuel Allowance will be paid on top of
the normal seasonal allowance that is paid during the winter months.

####  Additional Needs Payment

The [ Additional Needs Payment ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/additional-needs-payment/) can help you with an expense that you
cannot pay from your weekly income. The amount that you can get depends on
your circumstances and the type of help you need.

##  Getting a meter reading

Your gas meter measures the amount of gas you use. The readings are used by
your supplier to calculate your bill.

A GNI meter reader will call to your property to record the amount of gas used
since the meter was last read. This is done 4 times a year. An estimated
reading will be used for the other billing periods.

When new meters are installed, they are located in external meter boxes. For
older homes, the meter may be inside the home. If the meter reader cannot
access the meter, they will leave a card in the mailbox letting you know they
were there and asking you to submit your reading. You can also submit your
meter reading directly to your supplier. If you do not submit a reading an
estimated reading will be used to calculate your next bill.

Meters are the property of Gas Networks Ireland and must not be interfered
with in any way. Interference with a meter is against the law and offenders
can be prosecuted.

##  Understanding your bill

It can sometimes be difficult to understand the bill, particularly how the
amount you owe is calculated.

You should receive a bill from your gas supplier every 2 months. It must be
clearly marked whether the meter read used to calculate your bill amount was:

  * A – an actual meter read by GNI 
  * C – a read submitted by you the customer 
  * E – an estimated meter reading 

Check your bill to make sure that you are not getting too many estimated bills
in a row as this could result in a large bill when an actual reading is taken.
You can check your meter and submit your own reading at any time to ensure
accurate billing. GNI has information on [ how to submit a meter reading
](https://www.gasnetworks.ie/home/gas-meter/submit-meter-reading/) .

CRU has more information about [ understanding your gas bill
](https://www.cru.ie/home/customer-care/energy/about-my-bill/) .

##  How to use less energy

You can save on your gas bills by being more energy efficient.

The Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) helps consumers to improve
their energy efficiency. Get [ tips and advice on how to save energy
](https://www.seai.ie/home-energy/energy-saving-tips/) on heating, timers and
controls, temperature, hot water and draughts. lighting, hot water, cooking,
appliances and draughts. Making small changes to be more energy efficient can
help reduce your bills.

###  Energy efficiency grants

You may be entitled to a [ grant to upgrade your home energy system
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-
improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/) and improve the BER rating of
your home. This will lower the amount of electricity that you use. There are
also [ grants available for solar panels ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-solar-panels/)
.

Get more information on how to improve your energy efficiency and on the
grants available from the [ SEAI ](https://www.seai.ie/) .

##  More information

Read more about:

  * [ Switching suppliers ](/en/consumer/utilities/gas-services#led0f5)
  * [ How to complain about suppliers ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-utilities/)
  * [ How utility suppliers are regulated ](/en/consumer/utilities/regulation-of-utilities/)

_**Page edited:** 6 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/paying-
gas-bill/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Paying%20your%20gas%20bills&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/paying-
gas-bill/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/paying-
gas-bill/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Paying%20your%20gas%20bills&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/paying-
gas-bill/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Paying your electricity bills_ ](/en/consumer/utilities/paying-electricity-bill/)

Help with understanding your electricity bill and advice if you are worried
about paying your bill.

2723.4778

  * [ _Private Members' Bills_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/private-members-bills/)

Private Members' Bills are proposals for legislation initiated by members of
the Dáil or Seanad.

1236.7595

  * [ _Understanding your employment status_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/understanding-your-employment-status/)

Usually it is clear whether you are employed or self-employed. If it is not
obvious, this page will help you understand the important differences and
where to go for help in getting a determination on your employment status.

958.0089

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

