**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Advertising
and promotions ](/en/consumer/advertising-and-promotions/) > Advertising

#  Advertising

  * Introduction 
  * What is an advert? 
  * Rules banning false and misleading advertising 
  * How an advert could be misleading 
  * Who enforces the rules? 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Advertising is a key source of information for consumers. You have the right
to accurate and truthful information about products and services.

There are laws to protect you from being misled about products and services.
Businesses must not make statements in advertising that are incorrect or
likely to create a false impression – see ‘Rules banning misleading
advertising’ below.

Avertising laws apply to all types of communications that promote products or
services including:

  * Digital (online banners, websites and social platforms) 
  * Print 
  * Outdoor 
  * Radio and tv 
  * Leaflets or brochures and direct marketing 

##  What is an advert?

Businesses have more options for marketing products and services than the
traditional forms of advertising, which were print adverts in newspapers,
television and radio commercials, and signs in shops.

Advertising methods now include:

  * Email or text promotions 
  * Digital advertising on websites, apps, social mediaand search engines 
  * Paying for website content, for example, a travel article that mentions their brand 
  * Providing a product or service to a popular blogger or influencer for free or at reduced price in return for encouraging followers to try it 

##  Rules banning false and misleading advertising

The rules covering advertising in Ireland are set out under both legislation
and codes of practice. The main law covering advertising in Ireland is the [
Consumer Protection Act 2007
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2007/act/19/enacted/en/html) and updated
by the [ Consumer Rights Act 2022
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/37/enacted/en/html) . The law
protects consumers from misleading or false advertising.

It is an offence for a business to make false claims about products, services
or prices. Enforcement bodies can take action against a business that does not
comply with the rules – see ‘Who enforces the rules?' ’ below.

The law also recognises the various codes of practices that are published and
enforced by regulatory bodies. Where a business does not follow the code of
practice, the regulatory body can tell the business to change or withdraw the
advert.

EU laws on [ misleading advertising
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1988/si/134/made/en/print?q=misleading+advertising)
and [ unfair sales practices ](/en/consumer/advertising-and-promotions/unfair-
sales-practices/) also ban misleading advertising in all Member States.

##  How an advert could be misleading

Misleading or false advertising is an advert that deceives or is likely to
deceive you, or distort your decision to buy. An advert can also be misleading
if it leaves out important information that you might need to make an informed
decision.

Examples of how adverts can be misleading include:

  * False claims made about the characteristics of products and services - for example, a product weighs 900g instead of 1 Kg 
  * The price, or the way it is calculated, is misrepresented – for example, the product is advertised at sale prices but turns out not to be 
  * How a products or service is supplied is misrepresented – for example, it is advertised as ‘free delivery' but there is actually a fee or charge 
  * Details about the advertiser or trader are false – for example, claiming to be an ‘Irish based company' but is actually based abroad 
  * Creating a false impression even if the information is correct 

##  Who enforces the rules?

There are a number of regulatory bodies who are responsible for enforcing the
rules around misleading advertising.

###  Advertising Standards Authority for Ireland (ASAI)

The Advertising Standards Authority for Ireland (ASAI) is an independent self-
regulatory body set up and financed by the advertising industry. Its role is
to promote high standards of advertising and sales promotion. It publishes a [
Code of Standards for Advertising and Marketing Communications (the ASAI Code)
](https://www.asai.ie/asaicode/) . You can complain to the ASAI about a
misleading or false advert. If a member breaches the code, they can be
directed by the ASAI to remove or change the advert.

####  The ASAI Code

Under the ASAI Code, adverts should:

  * Be legal, decent, honest and truthful 
  * Be prepared with a sense of responsibility to consumers and to society 
  * Respect the principles of fair competition generally accepted in business 
  * Respect the spirit as well as the letter of the Code of Advertising Standards 
  * Avoid bringing advertising into disrepute 

The code applies to many different forms of advertising including:

  * Adverts in newspapers, magazines and other printed publications, including "free sheets" 
  * Posters and other promotional media in public places, including moving images and digital screens 
  * Brochures, leaflets, circulars, mailings, email and text transmissions 
  * Commercials broadcast on television or radio or screened in cinemas 
  * Ads carried on any digital and electronic storage materials, media and computer systems including online advertisements 
  * Sales promotion material 
  * Advertisement features and promotions 

Since 2016, the code contains new rules on the advertising of e-cigarettes,
gambling, food, advertising targeted at children, health and beauty and
environmental claims. The ASAI also issue guidelines to help businesses to
comply with the code and to raise standards in advertising. For example, in
2019, the ASAI issued [ guidelines on advertising of mobile phone and
broadband services ](https://www.asai.ie/press-releases/advertising-standards-
authority-for-ireland-asai-issues-new-guidelines-relating-to-the-advertising-
of-mobile-phone-and-broadband-services/) .

###  The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC)

The CCPC is an independent statutory body with responsibility for enforcing
competition and consumer protection law in Ireland.

The Consumer Protection Act gives the CCPC certain enforcement powers when
there is a breach of consumer legislation or fair trading. This includes the
power to take court action, where appropriate, against businesses that have
misled consumers with misleading or false advertising.

You can complain to the CCPC if you believe that an advert is misleading or
false and this had a major effect on your decision to buy. The CCPC website
has more information about [ misleading advertising
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/misleading-advertising/) and its role
in [ consumer protection enforcement
](https://www.ccpc.ie/business/enforcement/consumer-protection/consumer-
protection/) .

###  Other enforcement bodies

There are also different regulatory bodies for specific types of advertising.
These include:

  * **Broadcasting Authority of Ireland (BAI)** – The BAI is the regulator of broadcasting in Ireland and publishes its own code of practice. You can submit a complaint if you see or hear something on Irish TV or radio that is not compliant with [ the BAI Code ](https://www.bai.ie/en/codes-standards/#al-block-7) . 
  * **Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg)** \- ComReg is the regulator for the electronic communications and postal sectors. It has a [ Code of Practice ](https://www.comreg.ie/premium-rate/code-of-practice/) that regulates premium rate telecommunications services (products or services you can buy using your phone credit or paid through your telephone bill). Find out more about [ premium rate services ](https://www.comreg.ie/premium-rate/) . 
  * **Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI)** – The FSAI is a statutory independent body dedicated to protecting the public health and consumer interests in the area of food safety and hygiene. It works with the ASAI and issues guidelines setting out rules for the advertisement of food products. It also deals with complaints from consumers about misleading food information. 
  * **Central Bank of Ireland** – The Central Bank is responsible for making sure the financial sector operates in the best interests of consumers. It enforces additional rules on the advertisement of financial services and credit. Rules on advertising financial products are set out in the [ Consumer Protection Code ](https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/consumer-protection/consumer-protection-codes-regulations#consumer-protection-code-2012) and the [ Consumer Protection Code for Licensed Moneylenders ](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/Regulation/consumer-protection/other-codes-of-conduct/22-gns-4-2-7-licensed-moneylenders.pdf?sfvrsn=6) . You can read a summary of the advertising rules in the Central Bank’s [ consumer guide to the Consumer Protection Code (pdf) ](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/regulation/industry-market-sectors/brokers-retail-intermediaries/guidance/consumer-protection-code-v4.pdf?sfvrsn=4) . You can find out more about the [ advertising of credit ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/credit-advertising/) . 

If you think you have been misled, you can find out more about [ how to
complain about advertising ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-
advertising/) .

##  More information

You can find out more about [ consumer protection organisations
](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/consumer-protection-organisations/) .

###  Advertising Standards Authority

7 Herbert Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 K838  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 613 7040

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 613 7043

**Homepage:** [ https://adstandards.ie/ ](https://adstandards.ie/)

**Email:** [ contact@adstandards.ie ](mailto:contact@adstandards.ie)

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

###  Broadcasting Authority of Ireland

2-5 Warrington Place  
Dublin 2  
D02 XP29  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 644 1200

**Fax:** +353 1 644 1299

**Homepage:** [ http://www.bai.ie/ ](http://www.bai.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@bai.ie ](mailto:info@bai.ie)

###  Commission for Communications Regulation

One Dockland Central  
1 Guild Street  
North Dock  
Dublin 1  
D01 E4XO  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 804 9668

**Fax:** (01) 804 9680

**Homepage:** [ http://www.comreg.ie/ ](http://www.comreg.ie/)

**Email:** [ consumerline@comreg.ie ](mailto:consumerline@comreg.ie)

###  Food Safety Authority of Ireland

The Exchange  
George's Dock  
IFSC  
Dublin 1  
D01 P2V6  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 8171300

**Fax:** +353 1 8171301

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fsai.ie ](http://www.fsai.ie)

**Email:** [ info@fsai.ie ](mailto:info@fsai.ie)

###  Central Bank of Ireland

Financial Regulation

New Wapping Street  
North Wall Quay  
Dublin 1  
D01 F7X3  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 224 5800

**Homepage:** [ http://www.centralbank.ie ](http://www.centralbank.ie)

**Email:** [ enquiries@centralbank.ie ](mailto:enquiries@centralbank.ie)

_**Page edited:** 10 March 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-
and-promotions/advertising/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Advertising&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-
and-promotions/advertising/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-
and-promotions/advertising/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Advertising&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-
and-promotions/advertising/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Complain about advertising_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-advertising/)

You can complain about an advert to the Advertising Standards Authority or
other sector specific consumer organisations. Find out how and who to complain
to.

1245.4119

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

1244.8684

  * [ _Common Travel Area between Ireland and the UK_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/)

This page discusses the Common Travel Area between Ireland and the UK, an area
which is not specifically provided for in legislation.

1181.2566

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

