**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
services ](/en/consumer/buying-services/) > Company gone out of business

#  Company gone out of business

  * Introduction 
  * General tips around businessclosures 
  * What are my rights? 
  * Where to get more help 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Businesses stop operating for a variety of reasons. If you find yourself
affected by a business closure, you may be unsure of your consumer rights.

The terms _going into_ _administration_ , _examinership_ , _liquidation_ or
_receivership_ are all terms used to describe where a company is at risk of,
or is, going out of business. Read more about [ closing or selling a business
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/closing-a-business/) .

When a company closes down or has gone out of business, you could lose money
if:

  * You paid in full for a product that has not been delivered or a service that has not been provided 
  * You paid a deposit 
  * You bought a gift voucher or gift card that has not been used yet 
  * You bought a product that is faulty 

##  General tips around businessclosures

If you cannot reach the company or you want to check if they have gone out of
business, check their name on the [ Companies Registrations Office (CRO)
](https://core.cro.ie/) . Information about companies based in the United
Kingdom can be found on [ Companies House
](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/companies-house) .

You can also:

  * **Visit the business premises or website** \- Check to see if a notice has been posted, giving you any more contact information. 
  * **Find out your options for cancelling payment** \- If you paid by credit card or debit card, contact your bank to see if charges can be reversed due to the goods and services not being received. This is known as _chargeback_ . 
  * **Research to see if the business is licensed or a member of an organisation** \- In some cases, you may be entitled to compensation. For example, if a licensed travel agency goes out of business and if the paid travel services were not provided, you may be eligible to claim under their insolvency protection. 

##  What are my rights?

Whether you get your money back depends on the individual case. When a
business closes, common problems are:

  * The company has gone into liquidation of receivership 
  * There is a new owner 
  * You have an unused gift voucher or credit note 
  * You have paid a deposit but not received the goods or service 
  * Your goods are now faulty 

###  Company is gone into liquidation or receivership

If a liquidator or receiver has been appointed, the company is no longer run
by its owners. The company usually owes money to several creditors (a person
or company the business owes money to). If a business fails before you get a
product or service, then you are also a creditor.

Get the details of the liquidator or receiver (the person who is responsible
for settling the company’s debts) and make a claim in writing. You should
provide the following:

  * Details about the product you have paid for 
  * Exactly how much money you are owed 
  * What you would like them to do (for example, arrange for delivery of the item or full refund) 

However, there is no guarantee your claim will be successful. There are rules
for the priority to be given to various debts owed. Generally, you will be
treated as an _unsecured creditor_ . Revenue, banks and company employees are
secured creditors, so they get their money back before any customers. This
means that after the secured creditors get what they are owed there may not be
any money left to pay you.

###  If there is a new owner

If the company has been sold to a new owner, you need to find out if they have
taken on the previous owner’s liabilities and are willing to honour claims.
The new owner may not:

  * Be responsible for completing orders placed with the previous owner for goods and services not delivered 
  * Have to honour gift vouchers or gift cards issued by the previous owner 
  * Repair faulty products sold by the previous owner 

###  I have an unused gift voucher or credit note

If the company for which you have a voucher or credit note goes out of
business, you do not have formal rights to get a refund. This is because both
a gift voucher and a credit note are the previous owner’s responsibility. The
voucher becomes a debt the company has not paid and you are an unsecured
creditor.

It is still worth asking if the administrator, receiver, liquidator or new
owner will honour the voucher but it is unlikely you will get any money back.

###  I have paid a deposit or my product is on order

If you have paid a deposit on goods or services and the company goes out of
business before delivery has been made, you may find it very difficult to get
either the item you paid for or a refund.

Contact the administrator, receiver or liquidator to see if you can get your
product or money back. The business might not have any money left to pay you.

If you paid the deposit by debit card or credit card, contact your bank or
card provider to see if it will reverse the transaction using the chargeback
process.

###  I still owe money on something I bought on credit

If you still owe money on something you bought on credit (for example, through
Hire Purchase), you still have to make your payments even if the business
closes down. The credit is provided through a finance company that is separate
to the retailer.

###  What about faulty goods or services?

In general, when a good is faulty you have the right to ask the seller for a [
repair, replacement or refund ](/en/consumer/shopping/problems-with-faulty-
goods/) . However, if the company has gone out of business, this makes it more
difficult to resolve.

To get a faulty good fixed, replaced or get a refund, try to:

  * Contact the new owner, or administrator, receiver or liquidator to see if they will fix the problem for you 
  * Check if the product came with a manufacturer guarantee or warranty. 

If there is a guarantee or warranty, you should check the terms and conditions
to see:

  * Whether it is still valid (for example, it has not expired) 
  * If the fault is covered and what you are entitled to 
  * How to make a claim 

Follow the claim process stated and contact the manufacturer as soon as
possible.

##  Where to get more help

If a company has gone bust, and you have not got what you paid for, you can
try to get money back by asking for chargeback. This only applies if you paid
for the product or service by debit card or credit card. Contact your bank or
card provider to see if it will reverse the transaction (known as the
chargeback process).

Some other payment methods also have protection schemes (for example, PayPal
buyer protection). The CCPC has more information on [ chargeback
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/shopping/disputed-card-transactions-
chargeback/) .

##  More information

The [ Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC)
](https://www.ccpc.ie/) has a consumer helpline and website that gives
consumers information on their rights.

You can use out-of-court procedures such as the [ European Consumer Centre
(ECC) Ireland
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.eccireland.ie%2F&data=05%7C02%7CSimone.Hughes%40ciboard.ie%7Ccc0c4285e1b64a78b43408dc62ac8591%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638493740312917735%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=QRHyoM57V02UsOoXcW%2BdxE78lLq5yl0yWoWe4gBjdvo%3D&reserved=0)
(for cross-border disputes only) and [ Online Dispute Resolution
](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/online-dispute-resolution/) (for national and
cross-border online disputes).

Find out more about [ consumer protection organisations ](/en/consumer/how-to-
complain/consumer-protection-organisations/) .

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

###  ECC Ireland

Bloom House,  
Railway Street,  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Homepage:** [ http://www.eccireland.ie/ ](http://www.eccireland.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 24 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/company-gone-out-of-business/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Company%20gone%20out%20of%20business&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/company-gone-out-of-business/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/company-gone-out-of-business/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Company%20gone%20out%20of%20business&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/company-gone-out-of-business/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

1517.1212

  * [ _Boarding out of older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-people/)

Some Health Service Executive (HSE) Areas in Ireland operate a scheme where
older people are boarded out in private homes. Find out about the rules that
apply to these arrangements and how to apply.

1503.2432

  * [ _Renting out a room in your home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/)

If you rent out a room in your home, you have certain rights and
responsibilities. These are different depending on your home and the type of
accommodation you are renting.

1453.5022

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

