**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ How to
complain ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/) > Complain about a medical
professional

#  Complain about a medical professional

  * Private medical services 
  * What is professional misconduct? 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Taking your complaint further 
  * Further information 

##  Private medical services

There are different bodies that regulate private medical services.

Medical professionals must be registered with the appropriate body to legally
practice in Ireland.

These regulatory bodies keep registers of professionals and can remove a
healthcare professional from the register if they are found guilty of serious
professional misconduct.

This page explains where to complain about medical services you have received
from a private medical professional, or where you think a medical professional
working in a public healthcare facility is guilty of professional misconduct.

###  **Public health services**

Get advice on [ making a complaint about a health service
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/making-a-
complaint-about-the-health-service-executive/) if your complaint relates to a
public health or social care service.

##  What is professional misconduct?

Professional misconduct is behaviour that doesn't meet the ethical or
professional standards of a particular profession.

Examples of professional misconduct include:

  * Dishonesty 
  * Taking advantage of your age or inexperience 
  * Ignoring your instructions 
  * Using insulting, racist or sexist language 

##  How to make a complaint

Firstly, you should complain directly to the medical professional or service.
Make your complaint face-to-face, over the phone or in writing.

Explain what your complaint is about and how you want it to be put right.

You can ask the service about its complaint’s procedure, or you can contact
the appropriate regulatory body. See ‘Taking your complaint further’ below.

##  Taking your complaint further

If your complaint cannot be resolved by the professional themselves or by
their service (the clinic or hospital, for example), you can make a formal
complaint to the relevant regulatory body.

###  Doctors

Medical doctors in Ireland are regulated by the [ Medical Council
](https://www.medicalcouncil.ie/) .

The Medical Council can investigate [ complaints
](https://www.medicalcouncil.ie/complaints/) about a doctor’s fitness to
practise medicine. If the complaint is serious and raises concerns over a
doctor’s fitness to practise, the Council can restrict the doctor’s
registration. This could remove their right to practice medicine in Ireland.
The Medical Council has more information about [ making a complaint about a
doctor (pdf) ](https://www.medicalcouncil.ie/Public-Information/Making-a-
Complaint-/Making-a-complaint-about-a-doctor.pdf) .

###  Nurses and midwives

Nursing and midwifery professions are regulated by the [ Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Ireland (NMBI) ](https://www.nmbi.ie/Home) .

The NMBI is legally responsible for handling complaints against nurses and
midwives who practise in Ireland. If the complaint raises serious concerns
about the nurse or midwife’s fitness to practise, the NMBI can use [ sanctions
against the nurse or midwife ](https://www.nmbi.ie/Complaints/Sanctions) . The
NMBI has more information about [ making a complaint about a nurse or midwife
](https://www.nmbi.ie/Complaints/Making-a-Complaint) .

###  Dentists

If you are not satisfied with the response you receive after complaining
directly to your dentist, you can contact the [ Dental Complaints Resolution
Service ](https://dentalcomplaints.ie/) . They will work with you and the
dentist to resolve the complaint.

###  Pharmacists

The [ Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland (PSI)
](https://www.thepsi.ie/gns/home.aspx) is an independent public body that
handles complaints made against pharmacists and pharmacies.

Some complaints are resolved through mediation. Otherwise, the PSI will
arrange a hearing before a committee of inquiry. The PSI has more information
about [ making a complaint about a pharmacist or pharmacy
](https://www.thepsi.ie/gns/making-a-complaint/overview.aspx) .

###  **Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)**

The [ Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council (PHECC) ](https://www.phecit.ie/) is
an independent statutory body who regulate pre-hospital care in Ireland. PHECC
keeps a register of pre-hospital emergency care practitioners who meet the
required standards.

If you think that a PHECC registered practitioner has breached the [ Code of
Professional Conduct and Ethics
](https://www.phecit.ie/PHECC/Public_and_Patients/Code_of_Professional_Conduct_and_Ethics/PHECC/Public_and_Patients/Code_of_Professional_Conduct_and_Ethics/Code_of_Professional_Conduct_and_Ethics.aspx)
, you can [ make a complaint
](https://www.phecit.ie/PHECC/Public_and_Patients/Complaints/Making_a_complaint/PHECC/Public_and_Patients/Complaints/Making_a_complaint/Making_Complaint.aspx)
to PHECC.

###  Healthcare professionals regulated by CORU

A number of health and social care professions are regulated by [ CORU
](https://coru.ie/public-protection/) .

CORU currently regulates the following professions:

  * Dietitians 
  * Dispensing opticians 
  * Medical scientists 
  * Occupational therapists 
  * Optometrists 
  * Physical therapists 
  * Physiotherapists 
  * Podiatrists and chiropodists 
  * Radiographers 
  * Radiation therapists 
  * Social workers 
  * Speech and language therapists 
  * Social care workers 

The following professions will be regulated by CORU in the future:

  * Clinical biochemists 
  * Counsellors 
  * Psychotherapists 
  * Orthoptists 
  * Psychologists 

CORU, and the regulation of these healthcare professionals are set out in the
[ Health and Social Care Professionals Act 2005 (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/act/16/enacted/en/html?q=health+and+social+care+professionals)
.

###  Counsellors and therapists

A [ registration board for counsellors and psychotherapists
](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/counsellors-and-
psychotherapists-registration-board/) is developing a registration and
regulation system. When this is established, complaints about counsellors and
psychotherapists will be investigated by [ CORU ](https://coru.ie/public-
protection/) .

The [ Irish Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (IACP)
](https://iacp.ie/#cookie-dialog) promotes best practice and represents
counsellors and therapists. Counsellors and psychotherapists do not have to be
registered with the IACP.

You can [ make a complaint to IACP ](https://iacp.ie/complaints) about any
IACP accredited or pre-accredited member if you think there has been a breach
of [ the IACP Code of Ethics and Practice ](https://www.iacp.ie/iacp-code-of-
ethics) .

###  Vets

The [ Veterinary Council of Ireland (VCI) ](http://www.vci.ie/) regulates vets
and veterinary nurses. The VCI handles complaints about registered veterinary
practitioners and nurses. It can remove the practitioner or nurse from the
register.

The VCI has more information about [ complaints against a vet or veterinary
nurse ](http://www.vci.ie/Complaints-Procedures) .

###  Alternative healthcare practitioners

Some examples of complementary and alternative medicines are:

  * Acupuncture 
  * Herbs 
  * Homeopathy 
  * Therapeutic massage 
  * Traditional Chinese medicine 

There are no registration requirements for practitioners of complementary
therapies. However, clinics and professionals are still subject to consumer
protection, health and safety, competition, contract and criminal law. The
Department of Health has more [ advice about complementary therapy (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/10869/41988433a27b4554a3cdc6303d148936.pdf#page=1)
.

##  Further information

Find out more about [ your consumer rights
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-
rights/) .

Get more advice about [ how to make a complaint
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-complain/how-to-make-
a-complaint/) .

You can find out more about [ making a complaint about a health service
](/en/health/health-system/making-a-complaint-about-the-health-service-
executive/) and health service agencies.

###  CORU Health and Social Care Professionals Council

Infinity Building  
George's Court  
George's Lane  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 E98Y

**Tel:** (01) 293 3160

**Homepage:** [ http://www.coru.ie/ ](http://www.coru.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@coru.ie ](mailto:info@coru.ie)

###  Medical Council

Kingram House  
Kingram Place  
Dublin 2  
D02 XY88

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 498 3100

**Homepage:** [ http://www.medicalcouncil.ie ](http://www.medicalcouncil.ie)

**Email:** [ info@mcirl.ie ](mailto:info@mcirl.ie)

###  Nursing and Midwifery Board of Ireland

18-20 Carysfort Avenue  
Blackrock  
Co. Dublin  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (01) 639 8500

**Homepage:** [ http://www.nmbi.ie ](http://www.nmbi.ie)

###  Pharmaceutical Society of Ireland

PSI House  
15-19 Fenian Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 TD72  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 2837294

**Homepage:** [ https://www.thepsi.ie/ ](https://www.thepsi.ie/)

###  Dental Complaints Resolution Service

79 Lyster Square  
Portlaoise  
Co. Laois  
R32 PA07

**Tel:** 087 354 5842

**Homepage:** [ https://dentalcomplaints.ie/ ](https://dentalcomplaints.ie/)

###  Pre-Hospital Emergency Care Council

2nd Floor Beech House  
Millennium Park  
Osberstown  
Naas  
Co. Kildare  
W91 TK7N

**Tel:** 045 882042

**Homepage:** [ https://www.phecit.ie/ ](https://www.phecit.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@phecc.ie ](mailto:info@phecc.ie)

###  Irish Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy

1st Floor  
Marina House  
11-13 Clarence Street  
Dún Laoghaire  
Co. Dublin  

**Tel:** (01) 230 35 36

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irish-counselling.ie/ ](http://www.irish-
counselling.ie/)

**Email:** [ iacp@iacp.ie ](mailto:iacp@iacp.ie)

###  Veterinary Council of Ireland

53 Lansdowne Road  
Ballsbridge  
Dublin 4  
D04 NY29

**Tel:** 01 688 4402

**Homepage:** [ http://www.vci.ie ](http://www.vci.ie)

**Email:** [ info@vci.ie ](mailto:info@vci.ie)

_**Page edited:** 29 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/complain-about-medical-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Complain%20about%20a%20medical%20professional&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/complain-about-medical-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-
complain/complain-about-medical-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Complain%20about%20a%20medical%20professional&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-
to-complain/complain-about-medical-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Complain about utilities_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-utilities/)

Find out how to complain about your energy supplier or network, or Irish Water
service.

1761.8151

  * [ _Making a complaint about a pension_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/)

The Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman can investigate and decide on
complaints about pension schemes.

1652.6747

  * [ _Complain about advertising_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-advertising/)

You can complain about an advert to the Advertising Standards Authority or
other sector specific consumer organisations. Find out how and who to complain
to.

1614.5502

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

