**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Buying
services ](/en/consumer/buying-services/) > Your rights when buying services

#  Your rights when buying services

  * Introduction 
  * Before you buy 
  * What you can expect from the service 
  * If you are not happy with the service 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

The [ Consumer Rights Act 2022 (pdf)
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/37/enacted/en/pdf) introduces
new rights when you buy services. This page explains these consumer rights.
They only apply if you bought a service **on or after 29 November 2022.**

You have different rights if you [ bought on or before 28 November 2022.
](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/problem-with-
a-service-you-bought-before-november-2022/)

###  What is a service?

Consumer law covers many contracts for services. Examples of services covered
include entertainment, accommodation, transport, building works and
maintenance contracts. Personal services (for example, wedding photography),
pet care services, storage facilities and legal or other professional services
are also covered.

If you have a contract for a service, consumer law sets out the minimum
standards that apply and the remedies if the service falls short of these
standards.

##  Before you buy

You have a legal right to certain information before you buy a service,
including:

  * The trader’s business name, address and phone number 
  * Details about the service (if not already clear) 
  * Total price, or how it will be calculated 
  * Length of the contract (if applicable) 
  * Any extra charges, for example, delivery charges 
  * Your right to cancel (where it applies) 

The information must be clear, easy to understand and given to you before you
buy. You have additional rights to information [ if you buy online
](/en/consumer/shopping/shopping-online/) or [ from your doorstep
](/en/consumer/shopping/buying-from-a-doorstep-seller/) .

Traders must not make claims that would distort your buying decisions. A
seller who makes a false or misleading claim about a service is committing an
offence and can be prosecuted.

##  What you can expect from the service

If you have a contract for a service, consumer law sets out the minimum
standards that apply to the service. Services must be _in conformity_ with the
contract you made. In conformity means the service is as you expect it would
be according to the contract you made with the trader.

Services must:

  * Work as the trader said they would 
  * Match any advertisement and any verbal or written information you got 
  * Meet the terms of the contract, where the service is supplied with goods or digital elements 

The trader must:

  * Provide the service in line with the contract 
  * Have the required skills to carry out the service 
  * Supply the service with reasonable care and attention 
  * Only use materials that are fit for purpose and match any descriptions you got 
  * Charge you a reasonable price, where the price is not agreed beforehand (for example, it was based on an estimate or quote) 
  * Comply with all applicable laws 

If a trader tells you they will provide a higher standard of care and skill
than can be reasonably expected, or if they are subject to a standard set by a
professional body or a code of practice, they will be held to that higher
standard.

Read more about [ your rights as a consumer ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-
consumer-rights/) .

##  If you are not happy with the service

If things go wrong with the service, it is always the trader who should put
things right.

Under consumer law, the trader must resolve any issue, so the service meets
what was agreed in the contract.

The seller must correct the issue for free, within a _reasonable_ time and
without significant inconvenience to you. A reasonable time means the shortest
possible time to fix the issue.

Get more information on what to do if you have [ problems with a service
](/en/consumer/buying-services/problem-with-a-service/) .

##  More information

If you have a dispute with an Irish-based service supplier, you can contact
the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) for advice and
support.

Find out more about [ terms and conditions ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/terms-
and-conditions/) , [ unfair sales practices
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-and-
promotions/unfair-sales-practices/) , [ advertising
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/consumer_laws/advertising.en.html)
and [ pricing. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/advertising-
and-promotions/pricing/)

You can get more information from the CCPC about [ your rights when you buy a
service ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/contracts-and-services/contracts-and-
services/) .

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/your-rights-when-buying-services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Your%20rights%20when%20buying%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/your-rights-when-buying-services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/your-rights-when-buying-services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Your%20rights%20when%20buying%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-
services/your-rights-when-buying-services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights when you buy digital content or services_ ](/en/consumer/buying-digital-content-and-services/your-rights-when-you-buy-digital-content-or-services/)

This page explains your new rights under the Consumer Rights Act 2022 when you
buy digital content and services.

2644.3796

  * [ _Your rights when you buy a financial product_ ](/en/consumer/financial-products/your-rights-when-buying-financial-products/)

Find out about the rules that banks and other financial services firms must
follow when you buy a financial product.

2374.6462

  * [ _Your rights when you buy in a shop_ ](/en/consumer/shopping/rights-when-buying-in-a-shop/)

Find out about your rights when you buy something in a shop.

2165.9014

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

