**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Consumer ](/en/consumer/) > [ Phone,
internet, TV and postal services ](/en/consumer/phone-internet-tv-and-postal-
services/) > Eircode

#  Eircode

  * What is Eircode? 
  * How do I use an Eircode? 
  * How to find an Eircode 
  * How often is the Eircode Finder updated? 
  * I can’t find my Eircode 
  * My postal address is wrong on the Eircode Finder 
  * More information 

##  What is Eircode?

Eircode is the national postcode system in Ireland.

An Eircode is a unique 7-character code consisting of letters and numbers.
Each Eircode consists of a 3-character _routing key_ to identify the area and
a 4-character _unique identifier_ for each address. A typical Eircode might
read A65 F4E2.

All residential and business addresses have , which in some cases can be the
name of an individual, particularly for small businesses or sole traders.

Residential addresses include every address where post is delivered. Each
house on a street, each flat in an apartment block, each unit in a duplex unit
and each house in a rural townland has an Eircode.

In a halting site with numbered bays, each bay has been given an Eircode. The
Eircode belongs to that bay and not to the caravan. If a halting site has an
office that receives mail, the office address will get an Eircode.

##  How do I use an Eircode?

The Eircode should be placed at the end of the normal address, just below the
county.

For international post to an Irish address, the Eircode should go between the
county and country details.

It is not mandatory to use the Eircode. However, many businesses ask you for
your Eircode, especially for delivering goods or services to your address.

##  How to find an Eircode

You can find or check any Eircode using the [ Eircode Finder
](https://finder.eircode.ie/#/) . You can search using the address or by
locating it on a map on the Eircode Finder page. On a smartphone you can also
use the Get Directions option to navigate to an address.

###  **Personal data**

There is no personal data on the Eircode database or Eircode Finder. It does
include business names, which in some cases can be the name of an individual,
particularly for small businesses or sole traders.

##  How often is the Eircode Finder updated?

The Eircode Finder is based on information received from An Post
GeoDirectory..

Each quarter, Eircode receives an update with any new properties. Any new
address are assigned an Eircode. An Eircode letter is sent to the occupier of
that address.

##  I can’t find my Eircode

If you can’t find your Eircode, you should contact [ Eircode customer services
](https://www.eircode.ie/contact) .

If your address is a new property and it is not listed on the current Eircode
Finder, it will likely be in the next version of the Eircode Finder (updated
quarterly).

##  My postal address is wrong on the Eircode Finder

Eircode can’t change the postal address information on the Eircode Finder
unless An Post GeoDirectory tells them to.

If your address is wrong in the Eircode Finder, you should continue using the
address you normally use and simply add the Eircode. If your postal address is
incorrect, you can contact to [ An Post Customer Services
](https://www.anpost.com/Customer-Charter/Feedback-Complaints) to have your
postal address reviewed.

##  More information

For further information contact:

###  Eircode

Block C  
Maynooth Business Campus  
Maynooth  
Kildare  
W23 F854

**Tel:** 0818 300 005 or (01) 901 2232

**Homepage:** [ http://www.eircode.ie/ ](http://www.eircode.ie/)

**Email:** [ hello@eircode.ie ](mailto:hello@eircode.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/eircode/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Eircode&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/eircode/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/eircode/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Eircode&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/phone-
internet-tv-and-postal-services/eircode/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Political system at national level_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/political-system/)

This description of the way in which the political system operates at national
level includes an outline of the Oireachtas. It also contains an explanation
of the political terms used.

518.3176

  * [ _Children and the care system_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-and-the-care-system/)

Overview of the child care system in Ireland. What are the different types of
court orders?

516.9377

  * [ _Children and the criminal justice system_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/)

The Children Act 2001 regulates the treatment of children found in breach of
the criminal law.

493.34708

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

