**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
The deceased's estate ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/) > What happens to a
deceased person's money and possessions?

#  What happens to a deceased person's money and possessions?

  * Introduction 
  * Money in the bank, insurance policies andsavings 
  * Occupational and personalpensions 
  * The legal right share 
  * What happens when there is nowill? 

##  Introduction

When a person dies, their property passes to their personal representative.
The personal representative then distributes the deceased's person’s assets
(money, possessions and property) in accordance with the will - if there is
one - or the laws of intestacy if there is no will. These assets are described
as the deceased person’s _estate_ .

Here you can read about the law on what happens to the estate where a person
has left a will, or died without leaving a will (died _intestate_ ).

The personal representative is known as:

  * The _executor_ where there is a will 
  * The _administrator_ where there is no will, no executor appointed in the will, or the executor cannot or will not carry out their duties 

Our document, [ Dealing with the deceased person’s money and possessions
](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) explains
what the personal representative has to do with the estate.

If the person who has died left a valid will, the personal representative will
distribute the deceased person’s assets according to their wishes. You can
read about [ how to make a valid will ](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-
will/) .

##  Money in the bank, insurance policies andsavings

If money is held in the deceased person’s name only, then family members
usually cannot get access until probate is granted to the personal
representative.

But if the amount in an account is small, the bank may release it to the
personal representative or the next of kin.

###  Bank accounts in joint names

If the bank account is in the joint names of the deceased and the deceased's
spouse or civil partner, the money can usually be transferred into the
survivor's name. You will need the death certificate to do this.

If the bank account is in the joint names of the deceased person and someone
else, and the bank was given instructions when the account was opened that the
other person was to receive the money on the death of the deceased, the money
can be transferred into the survivor's name.

If there is an account with more than €50,000, you will also need a [ letter
of clearance ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-
inheritance/documents/form-ca4.pdf) from Revenue allowing the money to be
transferred to the surviving account holder's name pending investigations
about CAT liability.

Spouses and civil partners are not liable for [ Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT)
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) on
inheritances from each other.

Where the bank has no instructions, the intentions of the deceased person will
have to be examined (for example, by referring to their will)

###  Credit union accounts

If the deceased person had a credit union account and completed a valid
Nomination Form when opening the account, the money in the account - up to a
maximum of €27,000 - goes to the person or persons nominated on the form. Any
remaining balance forms part of the deceased's estate and is distributed in
accordance with the will or succession law if there is no will.

##  Occupational and personalpensions

The rules governing occupational and personal pensions depend on the terms of
the pension. If the deceased person was a member of a pension scheme, you
should contact the scheme administrators to find out if there is a pension for
the spouse, civil partner and/or children. Self-employed people may have
pension arrangements that involve some of the investments becoming part of the
deceased's estate.

Divorced people and those whose civil partnership has been dissolved may have
access to some part of the pension scheme depending on whether or not a [
pension adjustment order ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/) was made at the time of the divorce or
dissolution.

##  The legal right share

If you have left a will, and your spouse or civil partner has never renounced
or given up their rights to your estate, then they are entitled to a legal
right share of your estate. This legal right share is:

  * One-half of your estate if you do not have children 
  * One-third of your estate if you do have children 

Your spouse/civil partner does not have to go to court to get this share, as
your executor must give this share where applicable. If you leave a gift to
your spouse or civil partner in your will, they can choose to accept the gift
instead of their legal right share, or they can insist on their legal right
share (the specific gift can form part of the legal right share, but if it is
less then your spouse can request more from the estate).

Your executor must inform your spouse or civil partner in writing of their
right to choose between these two options. Your spouse or civil partner must
ask for their legal right share within 6 months of being notified, or within
12 months of the taking out of the Grant of Representation.

###  Where a legal right share does not apply

Your spouse or civil partner can renounce (give up) their rights to the legal
right share. This can be part of an agreement before marriage or civil
partnership or the spouse or civil partner can give up their rights to benefit
their children or other named beneficiaries.

If there is evidence of undue influence or evidence that the spouse or civil
partner did not understand what they were doing, the renunciation may be
challenged. It is normally advised that a spouse or civil partner get
independent legal advice if renouncing their legal right share.

The legal right share can be lost where the spouse or civil partner is:

  * Convicted of the murder, manslaughter or attempted murder of the deceased person 
  * Convicted of an offence against the deceased person or a child that carries a sentence of more than 2 years 

###  Divorce, separation and desertion

Separation agreements usually include a renunciation of both spouses’ or civil
partner’s legal right share.

If you are divorced or your civil partnership was dissolved, you do not have
to provide a legal right share.

If your spouse or civil partner deserted you for more than 2 years, they are
not entitled to a legal right share unless they deserted you as a result of
your behaviour (for example, domestic abuse).

###  Cohabiting partners

Partners, who live with each other but are not married or in a civil
partnership, have no automatic legal right to each other's estates, although
under the [ redress scheme for cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-
for-cohabiting-couples/) introduced by the [ Civil Partnership and Certain
Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2010/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) a qualified
cohabitant can apply for a share of the estate of a deceased cohabitant.

You can leave some or all of your estate to your partner but this does not
cancel out the legal rights of a spouse or civil partner if you were married
before to someone else and did not get divorced or had your civil partnership
dissolved.

###  Rights of children under a will

Children do not have any absolute right to inherit any of their parent's
estate if the parent has made a will. Children born inside or outside marriage
and adopted children all have the same rights and there are no age
restrictions.

However, a child can apply to court if they feel that they have not been
provided for. An application must be made within 6 months of the taking out of
a Grant of Representation. The court then has to decide if the parent has
failed in their duty to the child in accordance with the needs of that child.

Each case is considered individually, but it is important to remember that the
legal right share of the spouse cannot be reduced to give the child a greater
share of the estate. It can, however, reduce the entitlement of a civil
partner.

###  The family or shared home

The surviving spouse or civil partner may ask to keep the family or shared
home instead of their legal right share, although if the house is worth more
than the legal right share, the spouse or civil partner may have to pay the
difference into the deceased's estate. A court may decide that this sum does
not have to be paid if it would cause undue hardship

##  What happens when there is nowill?

If you die without leaving a will, then your estate will be distributed in
accordance with the law of succession.

This also happens:

  * When the will is not valid because it was not made properly 
  * When a legal challenge to the validity of the will has been successful 

The law of succession also applies to assets which are not covered by a will
such as where there is no residuary clause

The order in which your estate is distributed in these cases is set out in the
[ Succession Act 1965
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1965/en/act/pub/0027/index.html) .

If you are survived by:

  * **A spouse or civil partner but no children (or grandchildren)** : your spouse or civil partner gets the entire estate. 
  * **A spouse or civil partner and children** : your spouse/civil partner gets two-thirds of your estate and the remaining one-third is divided equally among your children. If one of your children has died, that share goes to his/her children. 
  * **Children, but no spouse or civil partner** : your estate is divided equally among your children (or their children). 
  * **Parents, but no spouse, civil partner or children** : your estate is divided equally between your parents or given entirely to one parent if only one is living. 
  * **Brothers and sisters only** : your estate is shared equally among them, with the children of a deceased brother or sister taking his/her share. 
  * **Nieces and nephews only** : your estate is divided equally among those surviving. 
  * **Other relatives only** : your estate is divided equally between the nearest equal relations. 
  * **No relatives** : your estate goes to the State. 

_**Page edited:** 15 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=What%20happens%20to%20a%20deceased%20person%27s%20money%20and%20possessions%3F&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=What%20happens%20to%20a%20deceased%20person%27s%20money%20and%20possessions%3F&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to access your personal data under the GDPR_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document explains how to access your personal data under data protection
laws and the GDPR.

1668.9321

  * [ _Dealing with a deceased person’s money and property_ ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/)

Find out about the steps involved in taking out probate or letters of
administration in Ireland.

1605.1975

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

1537.4613

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

