**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Sudden or unexplained death ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/) > When
someone dies unexpectedly

#  When someone dies unexpectedly

  * Introduction 
  * Identification of the body 
  * Release and registration 
  * Inquests 

##  Introduction

When someone dies, a doctor must be satisfied about the cause of death before
they can certify it and the [ death can be registered ](/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-death/) . If the doctor is not
satisfied about the cause of death or did not examine the deceased at least 28
days before the death occurred, the death must be reported to the [ Coroner
](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/coroners/) . The Coroner must also be
informed if the deceased died as the result of an accident, or in violent or
unexplained circumstances. The role of the Coroner is to investigate sudden
and unexplained deaths so that the death can be certified and then registered.

Generally the death is reported to the [ Gardaí ](/en/justice/law-
enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/) , who inform the Coroner.
The Coroner then decides whether a [ postmortem examination
](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/postmortems/) (also called an autopsy)
is needed. A postmortem examination is a medical examination of the body
carried out by a specially trained doctor called a pathologist and usually
takes place in a hospital mortuary.

##  Identification of the body

If the Coroner decides a postmortem examination is needed, then a family
member may be asked to formally identify the body. They are required to go to
the mortuary and identify the body to a Garda who is acting on behalf of the
Coroner. The Gardaí may require more information about the circumstances
surrounding the death.

Identification may sometimes be confirmed by a photograph or other means. In
such cases a family member is not required to view the body.

Where a Coroner has ordered a postmortem examination, the permission of the
family is not necessary.

##  Release and registration

The body is normally released to the family immediately after the postmortem
examination has been completed. [ Funeral arrangements ](/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/funeral-arrangements-and-costs/) should not be made
until the body is released or the Coroner has indicated when release will
occur. This is important at all times, but particularly on public holiday
weekends.

If there is a criminal investigation, it may be necessary to have a second
postmortem examination or further investigations. In this case, the release of
the body and the funeral arrangements may be delayed.

###  Registering the death

The death can only be registered by the [ Registrar of Births, Marriages and
Deaths ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-
certificate/) when the Coroner has issued a Coroner’s Certificate to the
Registrar. The Coroner will issue this after the postmortem report is received
or after an inquest is held. In the meantime the Coroner can issue an Interim
Death Certificate, on request, which is acceptable to the Department of Social
Protection for [ bereavement grants and other benefits ](/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/) .

##  Inquests

If a death cannot be explained by a postmortem examination, an [ inquest
](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-reports/) must be
held to establish the facts of the death, such as where and how the death
occurred. Where an inquest is to be held, the Coroner is usually able to allow
[ burial ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-burial-
grounds/) or [ cremation ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-
death/cremations/) once the postmortem examination of the body has been
completed.

For some deaths, inquests are legally required. In other cases, the holding of
an inquest is at the discretion of the Coroner and the family can make their
views known to the Coroner, if they so wish.

The inquest will not take place until at least 6 weeks after the death. It is
a public enquiry, presided over by the Coroner (and in some cases involving a
jury) into the cause of the death. Witnesses may be required to attend the
inquest to give evidence regarding the circumstances and cause of the death.
The family are entitled to attend the inquest, but they are not legally
obliged to be there.

When a jury is present at an inquest, it is the jury rather than the Coroner
who delivers the verdict. Nobody is found guilty or innocent at an inquest and
no criminal or civil liability is determined.

_**Page edited:** 22 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-
or-unexplained-death/when-someone-dies-
unexpectedly/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=When%20someone%20dies%20unexpectedly&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-
or-unexplained-death/when-someone-dies-
unexpectedly/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-or-
unexplained-death/when-someone-dies-
unexpectedly/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=When%20someone%20dies%20unexpectedly&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-
or-unexplained-death/when-someone-dies-
unexpectedly/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _When someone dies_ ](/en/death/when-someone-dies-in-ireland/)

If you have recently lost someone close to you or know someone who has
recently been bereaved, this will guide you through the immediate things that
you must do following a death.

2578.0562

  * [ _Financial support when someone dies_ ](/en/death/financial-concerns-following-a-death/financial-support-when-someone-dies/)

Supports are available in Ireland to help families following a bereavement.
Describes certain once-off Health Service Executive (HSE) Area and social
welfare payments. Find out how to apply.

2391.0967

  * [ _Visiting someone in prison_ ](/en/justice/prison-system/visiting-someone-in-prison/)

You can visit a family member or friend in prison.

934.7158

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

