**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Financial concerns following a death ](/en/death/financial-concerns-following-
a-death/) > Financial support when someone dies

#  Financial support when someone dies

  * Introduction 
  * Where to apply 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you have been dependent on someone and they die, you may need financial
support.

**What types of financial support can I claim?**

  * The Department of Social Protection may be able to offer you a [ one-off payment ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/benefits-and-entitlements-following-a-death/) to help you cope in the short term. 
  * If you have long-term needs, you may qualify for **short-term or long-term social welfare payments** . This may mean you continue to receive the social welfare payment that used to be paid to the person who has died, for 6 weeks after their death. Or it may mean you receive a social welfare pension, allowance or payment in your own right. 
  * If you have difficulty in paying your rent, you may be eligible for [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) or the [ Housing Assistance Payment ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/housing-assistance-payment/) . If you have problems with your mortgage payments, see our document on [ Mortgage Protection ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-mortgages/) for information on insurance that may pay off a mortgage in full in the event of a death. 

**Am I eligible?**

Each form of support has different requirements. You may need to meet certain
PRSI requirements or pass a means test.

For information on specific requirements, contact [ your local Social Welfare
Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

##  Where to apply

Contact [ your local Social Welfare Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) for
assistance and advice.

##  Further information

There is more information in our document on [ benefits and entitlements
following a death ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/benefits-and-
entitlements-following-a-death/) .

[ Information for those affected by bereavement
](http://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/en/publications/information/leaflets.html)
is a booklet produced by the [ Citizens Information Board
](http://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/) . The booklet has been specially
written to assist those following a bereavement. It includes information on
managing your money and dealing with financial difficulties, dealing with the
deceased's debts, dormant bank accounts, legal matters, inheritance, wills,
etc. This booklet is also available from [ your nearest Citizen Information
Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

Our document [ Insurance Protection on Mortgages ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-mortgages/) contains details of
insurance policies that are designed to pay off your mortgage in full in
certain circumstances.

_**Page edited:** 14 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/financial-
concerns-following-a-death/financial-support-when-someone-
dies/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Financial%20support%20when%20someone%20dies&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/financial-
concerns-following-a-death/financial-support-when-someone-
dies/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/financial-
concerns-following-a-death/financial-support-when-someone-
dies/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Financial%20support%20when%20someone%20dies&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/financial-
concerns-following-a-death/financial-support-when-someone-
dies/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _When someone dies_ ](/en/death/when-someone-dies-in-ireland/)

If you have recently lost someone close to you or know someone who has
recently been bereaved, this will guide you through the immediate things that
you must do following a death.

1718.704

  * [ _When someone dies unexpectedly_ ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/when-someone-dies-unexpectedly/)

An overview of what happens when someone dies as a result of an accident or in
unexplained circumstances.

1653.4136

  * [ _Financial supports for students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/financial-supports-for-students/)

Information on other financial supports for students in further and higher
education.

1197.6697

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

