**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Practical arrangements after a death ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-
a-death/) > Registering a death

#  Registering a death

  * Introduction 
  * What you need to register the death 
  * If the person who died had no relatives 
  * Getting the death certificate 
  * Death certificate fees 
  * Contact details 

##  Introduction

It is a legal requirement that every death that takes place in Ireland must be
recorded and registered. Records of deaths in Ireland are held in the [
General Register Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/af7893-general-
register-office/) , which holds records relating to Births, Marriages and
Deaths in Ireland. You can apply for a copy of a death certificate to any
Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths or to the General Register Office.

###  Deaths caused by COVID-19

Where a death is due to COVID-19, the death should be reported to the local
coroner's office. The coroner will send a certificate to the registration
office. You do not have to do anything else.

##  What you need to register the death

To register a death, you must bring a Death Notification Form stating the
cause of death to any Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths.

You get the Death Notification Form from the doctor who attended the person
who died. You must complete Part 2 of the Death Notification Form and take it
to the registry office. You will need to bring photo ID with you. The
registration is free.

You **should** register the death within 3 months of the date the person died.
However, you have up to 12 months to register the death. If you need to
register a death more than 12 months after the person died, you will need to
contact the [ General Register Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/af7893-general-register-office/) .

###  If the cause of death is not known

A doctor cannot give you the Death Notification Form if they do not know the
cause of death, or if they didn't see the deceased person in the one month
before the death occurred. In this case, they must inform a coroner who may
decide a post-mortem is necessary.

If the person died as the result of an accident, or in violent or unexplained
circumstances, the coroner must be informed.

There may be a delay in registering a death where a [ post-mortem
](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/postmortems/) is carried out. The
death is automatically registered where an [ inquest ](/en/death/sudden-or-
unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-reports/) or post-mortem is held at the
request of the coroner. [ The coroner ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-
death/coroners/) issues a certificate to the Registrar containing all the
details to be registered.

While you are waiting for an inquest or post-mortem to be carried out, you can
get an Interim Certificate of the Fact of Death from the [ Coroner Service
](http://www.coroners.ie/en/cor/pages/coronercontactdetails) . You can use
this to inform institutions like banks, insurance companies and the Department
of Social Protection that the death has occurred.

###  Stillbirths

You can read information on [ how to register a stillborn child ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering-stillbirth/) .

##  If the person who died had no relatives

The death must be registered by a ‘qualified informant’. This is usually a
close family member of the person who has died, but can also be:

  * A relative of the deceased person 
  * Someone who lived with the deceased person 
  * The deceased person’s personal representative 
  * A person who was present at the death 
  * An official of the hospital or institution where the person died 
  * A person who found the body or took charge of that body 
  * The person who arranged the funeral 
  * Any other person who has knowledge of the death and knows the details needed to register the death 

##  Getting the death certificate

You can get copies of the death certificate from the registration office when
you are registering the death. To get a copy of a death certificate at a later
stage, you can go directly to any civil registration office. You do not have
to order a death certificate from a service in the area the death took place.

You can also apply for a death certificate:

  * [ Online ](https://certificatespublic-webapp-prod.azurewebsites.net/)
  * [ In person ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-registration-service.html) at a registry office 
  * By [ emailing a completed form ](https://assets.gov.ie/41368/54a468251ce84642b6d14043ca5a481c.pdf) to [ GROonlinepayments@welfare.ie ](mailto:GROonlinepayments@welfare.ie)
  * [ By phone ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/contact-a-civil-registration-service.html)

Civil registration offices have different ways of handling requests for
certificates. You can find details about [ your nearest civil registration
office ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/births-deaths-and-marriages/find-a-
civil-registration-service/) on the HSE website.

##  Death certificate fees

There is no charge for registering a death. But you may have to pay for a copy
of the death certificate.

The fees charged for a certificate are as follows:

  * €20 for a full standard certificate 
  * Free if the deceased was less than 1 year old and you are getting the death certificate at the time of registering the death 
  * €5 for an uncertified copy of an entry in the Register 
  * €10 to have a certificate authenticated (only available from the General Register Office) 

You do not need to apply for a copy of a death certificate for social welfare
purposes, as the Department of Social Protection will have access to this
information once the death has been registered.

##  Contact details

Contact information for [ Registrars of Births, Marriages and Deaths
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/bdm/contactus/) throughout Ireland is
available on the HSE's website and from your [ Local Health Office
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) .

You can apply online for a copy of a certificate.

Application for late registration only should be made to:

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Registering%20a%20death&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Registering%20a%20death&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-death/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Getting a birth, marriage or death certificate in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-birth-marriage-or-death-certificate/)

This page describes how to get a birth, adoption, marriage, civil partnership
or death certificate in Ireland.

1931.4266

  * [ _What happens to debts after death?_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debts-after-death/)

Explains what happens to debts after a debtor has died.

1724.0089

  * [ _Access to money after a death_ ](/en/death/financial-concerns-following-a-death/access-to-money-after-a-death/)

It can be difficult to get immediate access to a deceased person's money in
Ireland unless it is in a joint account. Find out more here.

1657.3928

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

