**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
The deceased's estate ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/) > Dealing with a
deceased person’s money and property

#  Dealing with a deceased person’s money and property

  * Introduction 
  * Executor or administrator? 
  * Do I need a solicitor? 
  * How to make a personal application for probate or letters of administration 
  * What are the duties of executors and administrators? 
  * Can I get a copy of a will? 
  * Further information and contacts 

##  Introduction

Here we explain the process of administering a deceased person's estate in
Ireland, including:

  * Executors and administrators 
  * Probate 
  * Transferring land 
  * Tax 
  * Beneficiaries abroad 
  * Debts 

Our page on ‘ [ What happens to the deceased’s estate? ](/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate/) ’ has information about:

  * Rights of access to the deceased person's estate 
  * Rights of spouses or civil partners and family members 
  * What happens if the deceased person has not made a will 

If there is a will and an executor has been appointed, then the executor deals
with the estate. The executor makes sure that the spouse or civil partner is
aware of the right to a legal right share and distributes the estate in
accordance with the will and the law.

[ If there is no will ](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-will/) , or, if
there is a will but there is no executor, an administrator is appointed -
usually the next of kin or a [ solicitor ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/)
.

You can read more about the practical concerns you may have when someone close
to you dies in [ Bereavement - a practical guide (pdf)
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/downloads/guides/Bereavement_Guide_2023.pdf)
.

##  Executor or administrator?

To get authority to administer the estate, you must get a legal document
called a **Grant of Representation** . This is a legal order that gives you
the authority to administer the deceased person's estate.

####  If the deceased person left a will

The person who deals with the estate is called the deceased person's '
**executor** '. The executor needs to take out _Probate_ .

###  What is probate?

Taking out probate means having [ the Probate Office
](https://www.courts.ie/content/dublin-probate-office-principal-probate-
registry) or the appropriate [ District Probate Registry
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/2f5735d5-6c46-4489-8b5b-564b015aca9a/District%20Probate%20Registry%20Contacts%20Details.pdf/doc/1)
certify that:

  * The will is valid 
  * All legal, financial and tax matters are in order 

Wills only take effect when the Probate Office accepts that the will is valid.
The will is said to have been _‘proved’_ . The Probate Office may make some
enquiries before making its decision, for example, it may require a sworn
affidavit from one or both of the witnesses.

####  If there is no will

The person who deals with the deceased person’s estate is called an
**‘administrator’** . An administrator may also be appointed if:

  * There is a will but no executor has been appointed 
  * The appointed person cannot act as executor 
  * The executor cannot or will not carry out their duties 

The administrator needs to take out a _Letter of Administration_ (or a _Letter
of Administration with Will Annexed_ if there is a will).

Usually, the next of kin applies for a grant of administration. Priority is
given in the following order:

  * Spouse or civil partner 
  * Child 
  * Parent 
  * Brother or sister 
  * More distant relative 

The Probate Registrar will make a decision if there is doubt about who is
entitled to be the administrator. The administrator must give an
administration bond to the Probate Office - this is a sort of guarantee that
you will carry out your duties properly.

The duties of the executor and administrator are broadly the same. If you are
not sure about these roles, you should get legal advice from a solicitor (see
‘Do I need a solicitor?’ below).

###  What if I object to a grant of probate or a letter of administration?

Any person may oppose a grant of probate or a letter of administration. If you
have an objection, you can object (called [ lodging a caveat
](https://www.courts.ie/stopping-probate-application) ) to the appropriate
District Probate Registry or at the Probate Office.

##  Do I need a solicitor?

If the estate is complex, it may be better to appoint a solicitor.

A solicitor can complete the forms that are needed and give you advice on:

  * The law on succession 
  * Taxes that might have to be paid by beneficiaries 
  * Debts that may have to be paid from the estate 
  * The deceased’s will and can help settle disputes 
  * Finding out what the deceased person owned 

If you decide not to use a solicitor, you can make a personal application to
administer the estate (see ‘How to make a personal application for probate or
letters of administration’ below for information on how to do this).

The Probate Office will help with the probate process part of administering
the estate. It cannot give you legal advice and you are responsible for
completing the documentation you need.

You must use a solicitor if:

  * The person entitled to get the Grant of Representation is a [ ward of court ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/wards-of-court/) or of unsound mind 
  * The person entitled to get the Grant of Representation is under 18 
  * There are issues concerning the validity of the will 
  * There are disputes among the next of kin about the estate 
  * The original will is lost 
  * A beneficiary of the will of more than €20,000 (apart from the spouse of the deceased) lives outside of Ireland and the potential applicant for the Grant of Representation also lives outside of Ireland 
  * The deceased person lived outside Ireland and left a will in foreign language 
  * There are other circumstances which, in the opinion of the Probate Office, need the assistance of a solicitor 

##  How to make a personal application for probate or letters of
administration

To make a personal application you must attend in person. At any stage in this
process the Probate Office or Registry may decide that a solicitor is needed
to administer the estate of the deceased’s person.

You can follow this step-by-step guide to making a personal application:

###  Step 1 – Statement of Affairs (Probate) Form SA2

The SA2 is a Revenue form that is [ completed online through either My Account
or ROS ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/home.aspx) . You can read Revenue’s [ guide
to completing an SA2 form (pdf) ](https://revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-
inheritance/documents/guide-to-completing-statement-of-affairs-probate-form-
sa.2.pdf) .

To make an application you will need:

  * Personal details of the deceased person (including their PPS number) 
  * The applicant’s details 
  * Details of the beneficiaries, including the value of their inheritances and their PPS numbers 
  * Details of the deceased person’s assets (the things they owned) and liabilities (debts and things they owe money for) at the time of their death 
  * Information on assets passing outside the will or intestacy 
  * The will if there is one 
  * _Codicils_ (changes) to the will, if there are any 
  * Copy of any previous Grants of Representation if somebody else made an application before you (this is called a _De Bonis Non_ or Secondary Grant) 

When the form is completed and submitted, you will receive a Notice of
Acknowledgement (Probate) Form. You must print this and include it with your
Personal Application Form.

In limited cases, you can submit a paper SA2 form to Revenue. You must contact
the [ National Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT) Unit
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-service-contact/national-
capital-acquisitions-tax-cat-unit.aspx) explaining the reason why you cannot
submit the form electronically.

**If you don’t have a PPS number because you live abroad**

If you are a beneficiary and you do not have a PPS number because you live
abroad, you will need to [ apply to the Client Identity Services (CIS) section
of the Department of Social Protection ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/12e6de-
get-a-personal-public-service-pps-number/#applying-for-a-pps-number-if-you-
are-living-outside-ireland) for a PPS number.

You must provide proof of your identity and address, and you must complete:

  * An [ application form for a PPS number (REG1) (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/71515/6477c75d67ed40d2beccc6565c142d09.pdf#page=null)
  * A [ PPS number exceptional registration application form (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/124435/f883de3c-1a05-4666-bad4-a1af2af27841.pdf#page=null)
  * A short [ questionnaire (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/124438/26450805-5b58-4929-bd42-ce103d6aca23.pdf#page=null) with the name and date of death of the deceased 

You should send the forms to [ cis@welfare.ie ](mailto:cis@welfare.ie) , or
post them to: Department of Social Protection, Shannon Lodge, Carrick on
Shannon, Leitrim, N41 KD81.

###  Step 2 – The Personal Application Form

You must complete the [ Personal Application Form (doc)
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/f3d7529f-33e8-485f-b6d4-c13361c73dca/Personal
Application Form.doc/doc/1) and send it to the District Probate Registry or
the Probate Office in Dublin (see ‘Further information and contacts’ below).

You must include:

  * The original [ death certificate ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-death/#eaa472) (or a Coroner’s Interim Certificate of death if you have not received a death certificate yet) 
  * A photocopy of the will and codicils if there are any (do not send the original will) 
  * If the deceased person lived outside of Ireland, you should also send a Court Sealed and Certified copy of the Grant of Representation and will (if there is one) which was issued by the country where the deceased person lived 

The Probate Office or Registry may contact you to ask for more information or
documentation. You can read the Probate Office’s [ Guidance notes on
completing the Personal Application Form (pdf)
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/a3983bc2-d22a-4d12-a6af-54d8db50735a/Guidelines%20to%20complete%20Personal%20App%20Form.pdf/pdf#view=fitH)
.

Once the Probate Office or Registry has everything it needs to proceed with
your application, you will be given an appointment to meet with an official at
the Probate Office or Registry.

###  Step 3 – Attending your appointment

You must attend the appointment in person. Your appointment will take place in
private. You do not have to appear in a courtroom.

You must bring the following with you:

  * Your photo ID 
  * The original will and codicils if there are any 

The Probate official will look at your documents and may ask you some
questions. They cannot give you legal advice.

Another appointment may have to be scheduled if there are queries that cannot
be settled at the first appointment. The official may ask you to withdraw your
personal application and, in some cases, may tell you to get a solicitor to
make the application on your behalf.

You will make an oath or affirmation before the official confirming all the
details of your application are true.

The Probate Office or Registry will send you a Grant of Representation by
post. This usually takes around 3 weeks.

###  Probate fees

Probate fees are higher for personal applications than those made by a
solicitor on your behalf. The Probate fee is calculated based on the net value
of the estate.

**Probate fees for personal applications** Value of estate less than  |  Fee   
---|---  
€100,000  |  €200   
€250,000  |  €400   
€500,000  |  €700   
€750,000  |  €1,000   
€1,000,000 (1 million)  |  €1,300   
  
Where the estate is valued at more than €1 million, the fee is increased by
€800 for every €500,000.

**For example** , if the value of the estate is €1.6 million, the fee would
be:

  * First €1 million: €1,300 
  * Remaining €600,000: the fee is €800 for every €500,000, and the amount left over is assessed as another €800 
  * The total fee is €2,900 

All the fees listed above are for personal applications only. If you are
making an application through a solicitor, the fees are half of those listed
above. Your solicitor will advise you of how much the process will cost in
total.

[ Other fees are charged ](https://www.courts.ie/content/fees-payable-probate-
office-and-district-probate-registries) for certificates and affidavits.

##  What are the duties of executors and administrators?

You are obliged to distribute the assets as soon as possible after the death.
You may be sued by the beneficiaries if you do not distribute the estate
within a year.

You have a duty to preserve the assets of the deceased until they are
distributed and to protect the assets from devaluation. For example, you
should make sure that all assets are properly insured.

**You** **have the power to** :

  * Deal with the estate (for example, to sell it to pay debts or distribute to beneficiaries) 
  * Represent the deceased in legal actions and to settle legal actions against the deceased's estate 

**You must:**

  * Gather together and protect all the deceased's assets such as money, shares and property and find out their combined value 
  * Call in any outstanding funds due (money owing to the deceased) 
  * Pay any debts or taxes owed 
  * Pay the funeral expenses 
  * Make sure that the spouse (or civil partner) and children know about their legal right share 
  * Make sure the entitled beneficiaries or next of kin get what they are entitled to, and that ownership of property is passed on correctly 

###  If the deceased was getting social welfare

If the deceased was getting a social welfare payment, you must inform the
Department of Social Protection of the death before distributing the estate.
This is to allow the Department to reclaim any overpayment of pension that may
have been made.

The Department has 3 months to decide whether or not an overpayment was made.

If you fail to do this, you may be personally responsible to repay the
overpaid amounts. You can read more about social welfare requirements in the [
Department's document on overpayment recovery.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/914e25-operational-guidelines-management-
of-customer-overpayments-and-recov/)

###  **If the deceased or their partner was in nursing home**

If the deceased or their partner was in nursing home and getting the [ Fair
Deal Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/fair-deal-scheme/) , you must send [
the following to the Health Service Executive (HSE)
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/schemes-allowances/fair-deal-scheme/contact/)
at least 3 months before distributing the estate:

  * A Schedule of Assets - this is a list of all real and personal property and assets owned by the person at the time of their death 
  * Notice in writing of the intention to distribute the assets 

If you fail to do this, you may be personally responsible to repay any
potential overpayment of the Fair Deal Scheme.

###  Capital Acquisition Tax

The executor or administrator **does not** have to deduct and pay the [
Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-
acquisitions-tax/) due from the beneficiaries before passing on the proceeds
of the will to the beneficiaries. When probate has been granted, the Probate
Office sends a copy of the Revenue Affidavit to the Revenue Commissioners.

The Revenue Commissioners will then issue a Form IT38 to each beneficiary who
it understands may have a requirement to pay and file a CAT return. The
obligation to pay and file a return rests with the beneficiary. See [
Revenue's Guide to completing the IT38 return
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/completing-gift-or-
inheritance-tax-return-it38/index.aspx) .

###  Beneficiaries living abroad

If you are a beneficiary under an Irish will, you must supply a [ Personal
Public Service (PPS) number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) before a
grant of probate can issue. If you live abroad and don’t have a PPS number,
you must apply to Client Identity Services (see ‘If you don’t have a PPS
number because you live abroad’ above).

###  If the deceased dies in debt

If the deceased person dies insolvent or there isn't enough money to meet the
_bequests_ (the items left to someone in a will) made, payments from the
estate are prioritised in the following order:

  1. Funeral, testamentary and administration expenses – testamentary and administration expenses are the expenses incurred in dealing with your estate 
  2. Creditors who have security against the property of the deceased, for example mortgage providers 
  3. Preferential debts – these are mainly taxes and social insurance contributions due at the deceased person’s death 
  4. All other creditors 

Where the deceased person dies in debt, creditors can only bring a claim
against the estate of the deceased. Even if there isn't enough money in the
estate to meet all the debts, the relatives of the deceased are not personally
responsible for the deceased's debts (unless they had guaranteed them).

You can read more about [ what happens to debts after death ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/debts-after-death/) .

##  Can I get a copy of a will?

Once a grant of probate (or letters of administration) has been issued,
anybody can apply for copies of the grant and the will. You can [ search the
Probate Register online ](http://probate.courts.ie/probate.nsf) for grants
that have been issued.

To apply for a copy of the grant or will, you must complete the [ Probate
Order Form (doc) ](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/114d1844-9ef0-491b-86ff-
affd57b22d84/Probate%20Office%20Order%20Form.docx/docx/1) and pay the relevant
fee. You can pay the fee by postal or money orders, or by cheques made out to
The Courts Service.

The grant sets out the name and address of the executor or administrator of
the estate and the name of the solicitor acting on their behalf (if any). It
also sets out the gross value and the net value of the estate.

Detailed information about the estate is not normally available to the general
public. However, certain people may be able to inspect the Notice of
Acknowledgement (formerly known as the Inland Revenue Affidavit).

They include:

  * A beneficiary who is named in the will 
  * Someone who is entitled to a share of the estate 
  * A person who is entitled to bring proceedings against the estate under Section 117 of the Succession Act 1965 

You can read more about searching the Probate Register and getting copies of
the grant or will [ on the Courts Service website
](https://www.courts.ie/probate-register-online) .

##  Further information and contacts

The Law Society of Ireland has published a [ guide on the administration of
estates ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Solicitors/knowledge-base/Practice-
Notes/Administration-of-Estates-Guidelines-for-Solicitors#.Y1v8OnbMLIU) for
solicitors.

Questions about taxation and the deceased person's estate should be addressed
to:

###  National CAT Information Unit

Revenue Commissioners  
Capital Acquisitions Tax Unit  
9/15 Upper O’Connell Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 YT32.

**Tel:** 01 738 3673

**Homepage:** [ https://www.revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie)

Questions about probate issues should be addressed to your [ district Probate
Office
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/2f5735d5-6c46-4489-8b5b-564b015aca9a/District%20Probate%20Registry%20Contacts%20Details.pdf/doc/1)
or:

###  Probate Office

Personal Application Section  
First Floor  
15/24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 X028  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6174

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/ ](https://www.courts.ie/)

**Email:** [ ProbateGeneralOffice@courts.ie
](mailto:ProbateGeneralOffice@courts.ie)

If you are a beneficiary and do not have a PPS number because you live abroad,
you must apply to:

###  Client Identity Services

Department of Social Protection

Shannon Lodge  
Carrick-on-Shannon  
Co. Leitrim  
N41 KD81

**Tel:** (071) 967 2616 or 0818 927 999

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fd52ab-public-services-card/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fd52ab-public-services-card/)

**Email:** [ CIS@welfare.ie ](mailto:CIS@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 14 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Dealing%20with%20a%20deceased%20person%E2%80%99s%20money%20and%20property&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Dealing%20with%20a%20deceased%20person%E2%80%99s%20money%20and%20property&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-
estate/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Withdrawing from the international protection process_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/withdrawing-from-the-asylum-process-in-ireland/)

This page has information about withdrawing your international protection
application or appeal, and applications and appeals that can be deemed to have
been withdrawn.

896.30817

  * [ _Steps involved in buying a home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-home/)

This document looks at what you need to consider before buying a property and
the processes involved.

851.3068

  * [ _Working outside the EU_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/working-abroad/working-outside-the-eu/)

Includes a list of items to be considered before going to work in a non-EU
country and of the documentation you should bring with you.

844.2712

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

