**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Practical arrangements after a death ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-
a-death/) > Funeral arrangements and costs

#  Funeral arrangements and costs

  * Introduction 
  * Funerals during COVID-19 
  * Funeral directors 
  * Burials and cremations 
  * Funeral costs 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Funeral arrangements are usually made by the immediate family of the person
who died. The deceased person may have left specific instructions about the
funeral service they would like and where they would like to be buried or
cremated. Most people respect the deceased’s wishes where possible.

If there is disagreement about who should make the arrangements, the [
personal representatives of the deceased ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-
estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate/) are entitled to make the decisions.
The personal representatives are the executors of the will (if there is a
will), or the people who are administering the estate if there is no will.

You can engage an undertaker or funeral director to deal with most aspects of
the funeral.

##  Funerals during COVID-19

Dealing with the loss of a loved one has been different during COVID-19. The
pandemic has impacted many religious, cultural and family traditions – whether
the person has died from COVID-19 or not.

###  Practical steps when arranging the funeral

You should contact your preferred funeral director as soon as you can. The
Irish Association of Funeral Directors has published a [ Code of Practice
](https://www.iafd.ie/code-of-practice) that its members must follow when
helping to arrange your loved one's funeral.

Let people know that your loved one has died. Your funeral director can place
a notice on [ rip.ie ](https://rip.ie/) , and you may want to tell your local
newspaper or radio station.

You can read about Government guidance in the Department of Health’s [ Guide
for the Bereaved
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f43301-covid-19-coronavirus-a-guide-for-
the-bereaved/) .

###  If the deceased person had COVID-19

The funeral director should, where possible, allow the coffin to remain open.
Their decision is based on the potential risk of infection. To avoid infection
you should not kiss the deceased person.

You should avoid direct contact with the funeral director if you have been in
close contact with the deceased. Instead, try to arrange the funeral details
over the phone or by email. If you find this too difficult, you can ask a
family member to be your spokesperson.

If the bereaved family wants to wash and dress the bereaved person themselves
because this is part of your religious beliefs or customs, the funeral
director can advise you on how to do this safely.

The Irish Hospice Foundation has more information on ‘ [ Planning a funeral
when your relative has died from COVID-19 ](https://hospicefoundation.ie/our-
supports-services/bereavement-loss-hub/grieving-during-covid-19/planning-a-
funeral-when-your-relative-has-died-from-covid-19/) ’.

###  On the day of the funeral

A funeral venue can operate at full capacity. Protective measures, like mask
wearing are no longer required. You may feel more comfortable wearing a face
mask and can do so if you prefer.

Anyone with symptoms of COVID-19 should stay at home, away from the funeral
(even if they are a close family member).

##  Funeral directors

The Irish Association of Funeral Directors is the undertaker industry's trade
association. Members must follow its [ Code of Practice
](https://www.iafd.ie/code-of-practice) , this includes:

  * Discussing and agreeing in advance (unless expressly asked not to), the funeral director's charges and payment with the next of kin 
  * Providing full details of costs and payment 
  * Providing professional and quality services in arranging and conducting the funeral 
  * Providing accurate advertising of prices and services 
  * Sensitivity, confidentiality and a commitment to leaving the customer in control of decisions 

Individual funeral arrangements vary widely and depend on, among other things,
where the funeral is taking place, the type of coffin (casket) you get and
whether or not you hire funeral cars.

The funeral director's job may include the following:

  * Discussing the deceased's and the family's wishes and ensuring that all the details are taken care of 
  * Providing the coffin, the hearse, and the transport of family members 
  * Organising and paying for the grave purchase, grave opening/cremation charges, church offerings, newspaper announcements, flowers, music at the ceremony and catering 

###  Embalming

Embalming is a specialised process involving the replacement of all body
fluids with a substance designed to prevent the body from deteriorating. It is
not strictly necessary, especially if the removal and funeral take place
relatively quickly after death.

##  Burials and cremations

###  Burials

[ Burial grounds ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-
burial-grounds/) (cemeteries) in Ireland are governed and maintained by local
authorities. The local authority usually appoints a registrar or caretaker for
each cemetery to manage the sale of plots in that site and in some cases to
maintain the burial ground.

Prices for grave plots and burials in Ireland can vary a lot, so check around
for prices, if possible.

###  Home burials

It is possible to bury a loved one outside an official graveyard, for example,
on family land. However, it is very difficult to do so. It is wise to sort
this out well in advance of the death, as it may be impossible to organise it
legally at short notice. You will need a visit from an Environmental Health
Inspector from the local authority's health department who must determine
whether the proposed burial site will pollute any water sources or drainage
channels and will be located down to a depth of eight feet.

You should [ contact your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for further
details.

###  Cremation

[ Cremation ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/cremations/) is
an alternative to burial when someone dies. You can have the deceased's body
cremated, and dispose of the ashes by burying them in a family plot using
facilities provided by the crematorium or disposing of them privately.

##  Funeral costs

Funeral costs can vary widely depending on what you choose and depending on
whether it is a city or country funeral (rural funeral costs are generally
less expensive).

If you need financial support, you may be eligible for an [ Additional Needs
Payment ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/additional-needs-
payment/) . This is a single payment to help with essential, once-off,
exceptional costs (which you could not reasonably cover with your weekly
income). This payment is means tested. This means you will have to give
information about how much income you have, including savings and insurance
policies that the deceased family member may have had to cover funeral costs.

###  How to apply for an Exceptional Needs Payment

Ideally, you should apply for funeral assistance before the funeral takes
place. If not, you should apply as soon as possible afterwards.

You will need [ Personal Public Service (PPS) numbers ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) for
yourself, your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant and your children.

You will also need evidence of any income or social welfare assistance you are
getting (such as a bank statement).

Once you have your details ready, you can [ complete the application form
(pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/4eb45-additional-needs-payment/#apply)
and contact the Community Welfare Officer at [ your local office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/cb07d7-supplementary-welfare-allowance-swa-
list-of-offices-administering-swa/) .

##  Further information

[ Bereavement - a practical guide (pdf)
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/downloads/guides/Bereavement_Guide_2023.pdf)
is our publication for people who have been recently bereaved. It provides
information and advice on practical matters that arise following a death. It
includes information on what to do immediately after a death, possible social
welfare entitlements, tax, financial and legal issues and where to go for
further information and support.

The Irish Association of Funeral Directors has a [ Customer Care Charter
](https://www.iafd.ie/code-of-practice) that includes a complaints procedure.
The procedure involves investigating complaints, trying to find a resolution
and providing a full response in writing within 30 days.

###  Irish Association of Funeral Directors

Mespil House  
Mespil Business Centre  
Sussex Road  
Dublin 4  
Ireland

**Tel:** 0818 935 000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.iafd.ie/ ](http://www.iafd.ie/)

**Email:** [ enquiries@iafd.ie ](mailto:enquiries@iafd.ie)

###  Professional Embalmers Association of Ireland

7 Emmet Street  
Ballina  
Mayo  
Ireland

**Tel:** (096) 75290

**Homepage:** [ http://www.professionalembalmers.ie/
](http://www.professionalembalmers.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@professionalembalmers.ie
](mailto:info@professionalembalmers.ie)

_**Page edited:** 2 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/funeral-arrangements-and-
costs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Funeral%20arrangements%20and%20costs&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/funeral-arrangements-and-
costs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/funeral-arrangements-and-
costs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Funeral%20arrangements%20and%20costs&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/funeral-arrangements-and-
costs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/)

Information about the functions of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators.
This used to be called the Office of the Taxing Master.

1030.6146

  * [ _Types of decision support arrangements_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-support-arrangements/)

Decision support arrangements are available to give the legal authority to
someone to help you make decisions or make decisions on your behalf.

894.63074

  * [ _Legal fees and costs for civil cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/legal-fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/)

Explains what fees and costs means in a civil case.

873.2232

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

