**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Practical arrangements after a death ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-
a-death/) > Bringing a body to Ireland for burial or cremation

#  Bringing a body to Ireland for burial or cremation

  * Introduction 
  * Notification that an Irish citizen has diedabroad 
  * Formal identification of the remains 
  * Appointing a funeral director 
  * Unexplained deaths 
  * Registering the death 
  * Bringing ashes home 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Every country has its own rules about the formalities to be followed when
someone dies. The purpose of the following information is to set out the
general process and rules involved when bringing a body to Ireland for burial
or cremation.

The information is primarily for families of Irish citizens. Families of non-
Irish nationals should contact the relevant embassy for their own country for
advice, if they wish to bring a body to Ireland. You can find [ a list of
foreign embassies and consulates ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/)
responsible for Ireland. You can [ read about sending a body out of Ireland
](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/sending-a-body-from-ireland-
for-burial-or-cremation-abroad/) .

Repatriation of the remains of a deceased person to Ireland can be an
expensive process. If the person had travel insurance or private medical cover
that may help cover the costs. You may wish to consider having the body
cremated abroad and the ashes returned to Ireland. Financial assistance with
the cost of repatriation of a dead body is not available from the Irish
embassy.

##  Notification that an Irish citizen has diedabroad

If the [ Irish embassy or consulate
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) is notified of the death of an
Irish citizen abroad, the Garda Sióchána in Ireland are asked to notify any
family/next-of kin in Ireland. The embassy/consulate can also help communicate
with the police or other authorities abroad.

If you have been notified of the death of an Irish citizen abroad by a tour
operator or by someone else, then you should contact the Irish
embassy/consulate for that country for advice.

##  Formal identification of the remains

Before any arrangements can be made to return a body to Ireland, the remains
must be formally identified. The rules on who may formally identify a deceased
person can vary by country, but usually identification may be carried out by a
travelling companion or business colleague of the deceased. In some countries
it may be necessary for a family member to travel there to confirm the
identity.

Further information on the local arrangements for formal identification of
Irish citizens abroad is available from the [ Irish embassy
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) for the country where the death
occurred.

##  Appointing a funeral director

If you appoint a [ funeral director ](/en/death/after-a-death/funerals#l47eff)
in Ireland they can find a suitable funeral director in the other country and
make the appropriate arrangements. Alternatively, the [ Irish embassy for the
country ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) can provide help to Irish
citizens in appointing a local funeral director. If the death occurred on a [
package holiday ](/en/consumer/travel/package-holidays/) , the tour operator
should be able to help with arrangements. A funeral director is someone whose
business is to prepare the dead for burial and to arrange and manage funerals.
Services of funeral directors are not free so you should check fees and costs
associated prior to engaging these services.

The local funeral director can prepare the body for repatriation. The funeral
director can also prepare the appropriate documentation and obtain the death
certificate if possible. Assistance is also available from the Irish embassy
in obtaining documents such as the death certificate or medical reports. The
local funeral director can also make all the necessary flight arrangements.

##  Unexplained deaths

If the death was sudden or unexplained the coroner in Ireland for the district
where the body is being taken must be notified of the repatriation. If you
have appointed a funeral director in Ireland, the funeral director will
contact the appropriate coroner with the required documentation. If the
remains are being flown into Dublin airport, it is the [ Dublin District
Coroner ](https://www.dublincoronerscourt.ie/) who must be notified.

If there are concerns about how the death happened, the coroner may direct
that a post-mortem or an additional examination of the body be carried out. [
Read more about the powers of coroners ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-
death/coroners/) .

##  Registering the death

If the death is registered in the country where the person died, it is not
normally registered in Ireland. Where a system of registration does not exist
in that country or where it is not possible to obtain copies of the relevant
civil registration record (death certificate), you should contact the [
General Register Office in Ireland ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
birth-marriage-or-death-certificate/) to see if the death can be registered in
Ireland.

A death certificate is an important legal document, evidence of which is
frequently required in Ireland in order to deal with the deceased's estate.
Read more about [ dealing with the deceased person's estate ](/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

If an Irish citizen who has been ordinarily resident in Ireland within the
past 5 years dies abroad their death can be recorded on the [ Record of Deaths
Abroad ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/b9b43-record-a-death-abroad/) . Doing
this is voluntary but it allows the relatives of the deceased to notify the
Civil Registration Service of the death, to have the death recorded and to
obtain a certified copy of the record.

##  Bringing ashes home

Instead of bringing the deceased’s body home for burial or cremation you may
cremate it abroad and transport the ashes home. The transport of human ashes
will normally require a death certificate and a cremation certificate to be
presented at the place of departure. There may be additional requirements
depending on the country you are departing from. You should [ contact the
relevant Irish embassy or consulate
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) to check for any local
requirements.

You should also contact you transport carrier to find out if the ashes should
be carried as hand luggage or as checked-in luggage. You may be asked to carry
the ashes in a non-metallic container so they can be x-rayed by security.

##  Further information

You can find contact information for [ all Irish embassies and consulates
abroad ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) .

###  Irish Association of Funeral Directors

Mespil House  
Mespil Business Centre  
Sussex Road  
Dublin 4  
Ireland

**Tel:** 0818 935 000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.iafd.ie/ ](http://www.iafd.ie/)

**Email:** [ enquiries@iafd.ie ](mailto:enquiries@iafd.ie)

###  Coroner Service

**Homepage:** [ http://www.coroners.ie ](http://www.coroners.ie)

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

###  Department of Foreign Affairs

Consular Assistance

**Tel:** +353 1 408 2000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/consular-
services/ ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/consular-services/)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.dfa.ie/about-us/contact-us/contact-consular-
assistance/ ](https://www.dfa.ie/about-us/contact-us/contact-consular-
assistance/)

_**Page edited:** 7 December 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/bringing-a-body-to-ireland-for-burial-or-
cremation/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Bringing%20a%20body%20to%20Ireland%20for%20burial%20or%20cremation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/bringing-a-body-to-ireland-for-burial-or-
cremation/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/bringing-a-body-to-ireland-for-burial-or-
cremation/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Bringing%20a%20body%20to%20Ireland%20for%20burial%20or%20cremation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/bringing-a-body-to-ireland-for-burial-or-
cremation/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Sending a body from Ireland for burial or cremation abroad_ ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/sending-a-body-from-ireland-for-burial-or-cremation-abroad/)

Before the body of a deceased person can be sent out of Ireland, certain
formalities must be followed. Find out more.

3734.4712

  * [ _Bringing your non-EEA spouse or civil partner home to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-non-eea-spouse/)

A step-by-step guide to the immigration process for your non-EEA spouse or
civil partner. Outlines the process for bringing your spouse or civil partner
who is not from the EEA, the EU, the UK or Switzerland, home to Ireland to
live and work.

2211.6711

  * [ _Bringing your vehicle to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/bringing-your-vehicle-back-to-ireland/)

Find out if you can claim an exemption from VRT, VAT and customs duty when
bringing your car to Ireland.

1998.0696

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

