**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Sudden or unexplained death ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/) >
Inquests and inquest reports

#  Inquests and inquest reports

  * Introduction 
  * How do inquests work? 
  * When is a jury required? 
  * Witness at an inquest 
  * Findings of an inquest 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

An inquest is an official, public enquiry, led by a [ coroner
](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/coroners/) (and in some cases
involving a [ jury ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury-service/) ) into the
circumstances of a sudden, unexplained or violent death. The coroner, or a
jury, can make findings on:

  * The identity of the deceased person 
  * How, when and where the death occurred 
  * The circumstances surrounding the death 

The family of the deceased person is entitled to attend the inquest, but they
are not legally obliged to be there. If the family attend the inquest, they do
not need legal representation. Sometimes however, if legal action is being
taken as a result of the death, the family may engage a solicitor to attend
the inquest and take appropriate notes.

An inquest is not usually held if a [ post-mortem examination
](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/postmortems/) of the body can explain
the cause of death.

##  How do inquests work?

When a person dies and the death is sudden, unnatural, violent or unexplained,
the death must be [ reported to the Coroner ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-
death/coroners/) . The Coroner can arrange for a post-mortem examination of
the body, if one has not already been arranged or carried out.

If the [ post-mortem examination ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-
death/postmortems/) shows that death was due to natural causes there is no
need for an inquest. The Coroner can issue a Coroner's Certificate to the
Registrar of Births and Deaths who will then [ register the death
](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-death/) and
issue the death certificate. If the cause of death is unnatural, or other
issues surrounding the death are unknown, the Coroner carries out an inquest.
If more than one person died in the same incident, the Minister for Justice
may decide that only one inquest is needed, and can ask the Coroner in one
district to take charge of the inquest for the deceased people who may have
lived in other districts.

The Minister can also direct an inquest where the remains of the deceased
person have been destroyed or [ cannot be recovered ](/en/death/sudden-or-
unexplained-death/missing-presumed-dead/) .

###  Notifying the family of the deceased

The Coroner must give at least 14 days’ notice of the date that the inquest
will take place to notify:

  * Family members of the deceased person 
  * Witnesses who are required to attend 
  * Anyone else that the Coroner thinks should be notified of the inquest 

###  What happens if the Gardaí make criminal charges?

A senior Garda can ask the Coroner to adjourn (put on hold) the inquest if
criminal charges are being considered or have already been made.

After the criminal charges have been determined, the Coroner may choose to
resume the inquest if the Coroner thinks there are special reasons for doing
so.

###  Inquests are in public

All inquests are public and anyone can attend. Reports of an inquest may be
published in national and local newspapers, but in practice only a minority of
inquests are actually reported. You can get a copy of an inquest report from
the Coroner’s Office when the inquest has concluded. See ‘Findings of an
inquest’ below.

##  When is a jury required?

In some circumstances a jury must be present at an inquest. Every citizen over
18 years of age living within a coroner's district is liable to serve on the
jury unless they are exempt. The inquest jury is made up of 6-12 people. A
jury is required at an inquest where:

  * The death is due to murder, manslaughter or infanticide (when a mother kills her child when the child is less than 12 months old) 
  * The death took place in prison 
  * The death was caused by an accident, poisoning or a disease requiring notification to a government department or inspector 
  * The death occurred in circumstances, which if they continued or happened again would put member(s) of the public in danger 
  * The Coroner considers that a jury is necessary 

To attend as a juror at an inquest, you will receive a summons served from a
member of An Garda Síochána. This summons can be served by delivering it to
you directly or by sending to you by registered post. Alternatively the
summons can be delivered to a person over 16 years old who lives in your
residence. Failure to attend jury service without a reasonable excuse is an
offence and you will face penalties.

If the jury as a whole at the inquest cannot agree on its verdict, the [
Coroner ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/coroners/) must accept a
majority decision from the jury. If there is no majority verdict, the Coroner
must discharge the jury and hold a new inquest.

##  Witness at an inquest

The [ Coroner ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/coroners/) decides which
witnesses should give evidence at the inquest and the order in which they
should give their evidence. Evidence must be presented in a logical order to
describe the sequence of the circumstances surrounding the death. The [ post-
mortem ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/postmortems/) result
establishes the medical cause of death.

If you are required to attend an inquest as a witness, you can claim for loss
of earnings and expenses. The rates for fees and expenses are set by [
statutory instrument
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2009/si/155/made/en/print) .

##  Findings of an inquest

Nobody is found guilty or innocent at an inquest, and no criminal or civil
liability is determined. All depositions, post-mortem reports and verdict
records are preserved by the [ Coroner ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-
death/coroners/) and made available to the public.

When the proceedings have been completed, a verdict is provided in relation to
the identity of the deceased, and how, when and where the death occurred. The
range of verdicts that can be declared by the Coroner or jury include:

  * Accidental death 
  * Misadventure 
  * [ Suicide ](/en/death/bereavement-counselling-and-support/support-services-for-those-affected-by-suicide/)
  * Natural causes 
  * Unlawful killing 
  * Open verdict 

An ‘open’ verdict means that the evidence does not fully or clearly explain
the cause and circumstances of death. It is most commonly used when none of
the other verdicts are appropriate.

The coroner or jury may also make a general recommendation to prevent similar
deaths occurring, without deciding whose fault the death was.

After the inquest is completed, the Coroner will issue a certificate so that
the [ death can be properly registered ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-
after-a-death/registering-a-death/) .

###  Official reports of inquests

As inquests are public enquiries, it is possible to obtain a copy of the post-
mortem report and any depositions taken at the inquest, including a copy of
the verdict. These official reports are only available after the inquest has
concluded. There is a small fee for these documents. Inquest papers are not
available before the inquest has been held.

##  Further information

The Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission have [ information on the
rights of families at an inquest
](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/05/Information-on-the-Rights-of-
Families-at-Inquests-web.pdf) .

If you have been summoned as a witness or jury member for an inquest, you will
be notified of the date, time, and venue. If you have any questions about the
inquest, contact [ your local Garda station
](http://www.garda.ie/Stations/Default.aspx) .

You can get copies of official reports of inquests from the local Coroner's
office. To get a report, you will need to write to the Coroner's Office
requesting this information and include the name of the deceased, the date of
death, the hospital involved (if any) and the date of the inquest (if you know
this).

_**Page edited:** 19 September 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-
or-unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-
reports/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Inquests%20and%20inquest%20reports&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-
or-unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-
reports/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-or-
unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-
reports/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Inquests%20and%20inquest%20reports&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/sudden-
or-unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-
reports/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Agency agreements, trusts, and ordinary powers of attorney_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-incapacity/)

If you need someone to act on your behalf, this page explains some of the
arrangements available.

900.9225

  * [ _Victims of crime and the law_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/victims-and-the-law/)

Legislation that has been implemented to protect and support victims of crime.

879.94147

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

817.3522

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

