**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Death and Bereavement ](/en/death/) > [
Practical arrangements after a death ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-
a-death/) > Burials and burial grounds

#  Burials and burial grounds

  * Introduction 
  * Purchasing a burial plot 
  * Looking after burial grounds 
  * Burial at sea 
  * Exhumation 
  * Legislation 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Burial grounds (cemeteries) are the responsibility of the [ local authority
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/local-and-regional-
government/functions-of-local-authorities/) . Many of them are operated by
local authorities who appoint a registrar or caretaker to manage the sale of
plots. Parishes and local groups also operate burial grounds. If you want to
purchase a burial plot, you can [ contact your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to get contact
details.

All burials must be registered with the local authority and the location of
the grave noted. This is done by the people who manage the graveyard.

##  Purchasing a burial plot

Many funeral directors offer to handle the purchase of burial plots as part of
their package of funeral services. Or, you can contact your local authority
and they can tell you how to purchase a plot.

The cost of buying a burial plot varies. If you hire funeral directors to
arrange the purchase for you, they will indicate how much the burial plot
costs as part of the overall expense of a funeral.

Many burial grounds or graveyards are already full, and there may be
restrictions on the pre-purchase or buying in advance of burial plots, such as
limiting advance buying to those over 65 years of age.

###  Gravestones

It is possible to design a headstone yourself or hire a sculptor to make it
for you. The funeral directors you employ will arrange the construction and
installation of the headstone. It is necessary to obtain permission before
erecting headstones, but the funeral directors will arrange this also.

###  Burial where the deceased has no means

If someone dies without the means to pay for burial and if this person has no
traceable next of kin, it is the responsibility of the Department of Social
Protection or local authority to ensure that the person is buried in a
dignified manner. The Department or local authority will also be liable for
the charges and costs involved in doing so.

##  Looking after burial grounds

Graveyards are maintained either by caretakers hired by the local authority or
by volunteer groups. If you want to start or join a voluntary cemetery
maintenance group your local authority may be able to help you.

These groups are often supported by burial ground maintenance grants. This
grant helps towards the cost of the groups' activities, which may include
grass cutting, planting, weed control and the maintenance of gates and walls.

##  Burial at sea

The Department of Transport has developed [ guidelines for those considering
burial at sea ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/de81b8-burial-at-sea/) . These
guidelines are based on previous experience and seek to prevent distressing
situations, such as where a body is returned to shore.

The guidelines recommend that you should consider [ cremation
](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/cremations/) and scattering
the ashes at sea rather than burial.

In the event of burial, the guidelines make recommendations about matters such
as:

  * Location of the burial 
  * Design and construction of the coffin 
  * Preparation of the deceased 

See â€˜Further information' below for contact details of the Irish Maritime
Directorate within the Department of Transport.

##  Exhumation

It is only in strict circumstances that [ exhumation ](/en/death/sudden-or-
unexplained-death/exhumation-of-the-remains-of-a-deceased-person/) occurs.
Some examples of situations where an exhumation of interred remains from a
burial ground might be take place include:

  * If the family of the deceased person requests that the remains be moved to another burial ground 
  * For public health reasons (for example, if a graveyard or cemetery is being moved) 
  * When a court orders an exhumation as part of a criminal investigation 

At all times during the process, due regard for respect to the deceased
person, other interred remains in the burial ground or graveyard and privacy
of the family and friends of the deceased person is protected.

##  Legislation

The main rules for burial grounds are set out in the Rules & Regulations for
the Regulation of Burial Grounds 1888 and the relevant amending regulations.
Each local authority makes bye-laws in relation to the regulation of burial
grounds in their area.

They cover various matters including the allocation, size and purchase of
burial plots, the recording of burials, the maintenance of a register of
burials, and the requirements regarding headstones and monuments, as well the
depth of burials and first interments.

The [ Burial Ground (Amendment) Regulations 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2013/si/144/made/en/print) amended the
1888 Regulations to allow for uncoffined burials in an area of a burial ground
designated exclusively for that purpose.

##  Further information

For all matters related to burial plots or graveyards in general, contact your
[ local authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-
authorities/) .

For further information on burial at sea, contact the Irish Maritime
Directorate at the following address:

###  Irish Maritime Directorate

Department of Transport

Leeson Lane,  
Dublin 2  
D02 TR60

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-transport/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-transport/)

**Email:** [ maritimeenvironmentdivision@transport.gov.ie
](mailto:maritimeenvironmentdivision@transport.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-burial-
grounds/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Burials%20and%20burial%20grounds&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-burial-
grounds/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-burial-
grounds/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Burials%20and%20burial%20grounds&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/practical-
arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-burial-
grounds/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Bringing a body to Ireland for burial or cremation_ ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/bringing-a-body-to-ireland-for-burial-or-cremation/)

When someone dies abroad it is often difficult to know what to do. Find out
here the steps to take to bring a body home for burial or cremation

1367.2476

  * [ _Sending a body from Ireland for burial or cremation abroad_ ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/sending-a-body-from-ireland-for-burial-or-cremation-abroad/)

Before the body of a deceased person can be sent out of Ireland, certain
formalities must be followed. Find out more.

1229.9037

  * [ _Local Authority Purchase and Renovation Loan_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/local-authority-purchase-and-renovation-loan/)

Government-backed mortgage and loan that helps you to buy and renovate a
derelict or uninhabitable home.

965.46985

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

