**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Farming and managing land ](/en/environment/land/) > Hedge cutting

#  Hedge cutting

  * Introduction 
  * When can I cut my hedges? 
  * How do I report illegal hedge cutting? 
  * Can I cut my neighbour’s hedge? 
  * More information on hedge cutting 

##  Introduction

Ireland has many hedges (or hedgerows), usually found around the edges of
fields, land boundaries, or by the sides of roads. These hedges are natural
habitats for animals and can provide food and shelter for them, especially
birds.

Other benefits of having hedgerows include the following:

  * Providing food for insects (such as nectar for bees) 
  * Creating wildlife corridors 
  * Storing carbon 
  * Helping to mitigate fertilizer run off 

There are rules around what time of year you can cut hedges in Ireland. This
is to stop people cutting hedges during bird nesting season and to give birds
a chance to nest safely and to raise their young.

Other species which rely on hedges include:

  * Badgers 
  * Owls 
  * Hedgehogs 
  * Stoats 
  * Butterflies 

##  When can I cut my hedges?

You can cut hedges between 1 September and the end of February. It is illegal
to cut hedges between 1 March and 31 August. This includes:

  * Cutting 
  * Grubbing (digging or excavating) 
  * Burning 
  * Destroying 

Some exceptions to this rule apply to businesses, landowners and the public.
These include:

  * Destructing any vegetation growing on or in a hedge or ditch during the ordinary course of farming or forestry 
  * Clearing vegetation during road or construction works or while developing or preparing building sites 
  * Cutting, felling, lopping, trimming or removing a tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation on your land to stop it being a hazard to people using a public road. This is explained in more detail in [ section 70 of the Roads Act 1993 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1993/act/14/revised/en/html#SEC70) . 

##  How do I report illegal hedge cutting?

If you see someone illegally cutting a hedge, you should report it to:

  * Your [ local National Parks and Wildlife Services (NPWS) office ](https://www.npws.ie/contact-us)
  * Your [ local Garda station ](https://www.garda.ie/en/contact-us/station-directory/)

Since whoever you report the crime to may not be able to respond immediately,
you should make note of certain information, such as the following:

  * Time and date of the incident 
  * Registration of any vehicles involved 

It may also be useful to take a photo of the incident, especially to record
the vehicle registration number. However, you don’t need to send these to the
NPWS or Gardaí when reporting the incident.

##  Can I cut my neighbour’s hedge?

A tree or hedge on a boundary is generally the property of both you and your
neighbour. You cannot cut down the tree or hedge without your neighbour’s
permission.

Overhanging branches or roots encroaching on your land can be cut back without
permission, but only as far as the boundary line. You should still discuss
this with your neighbour to avoid disagreements.

You should ensure that the tree is not the subject of a tree preservation
order. Tree preservation orders are made by the local authority. You should
check with the local authority before cutting back or taking any action
against a tree that is subject to a tree preservation order.

##  More information on hedge cutting

The National Parks and Wildlife Service have [ more information about
restrictions on cutting hedgerows ](https://www.npws.ie/legislation/irish-
law/restrictions-cutting-hedgerows) .

Teagasc has a useful [ guide on hedgerow management (pdf)
](https://www.teagasc.ie/media/website/environment/biodiversity-
countryside/Hedgerow-Management.pdf) .

For information on the importance of hedgerows and how to plant, manage and
maintain hedgerows, see [ Hedgerows Ireland ](https://hedgerows.ie/) .

The National Biodiversity Data Centre also have [ useful information on
hedgerows and their benefits to wildlife and biodiversity
](https://pollinators.ie/new-hedgerow-resources/) .

For information on controlled fires and burning vegetation, see our page on [
Burning waste and vegetation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/burning-household-waste/#813916) .

_**Page edited:** 19 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/hedge-
cutting/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Hedge%20cutting&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/hedge-
cutting/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/hedge-
cutting/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Hedge%20cutting&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/hedge-
cutting/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Getting around when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to get around when you return to Ireland,
including public transport services, taxis, car rental, driving licences, tram
services and more.

748.7633

  * [ _Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)

Information on buying car insurance after you return to Ireland, how to use
your claims free driving experience from abroad and what to do if you are
refused insurance cover.

618.2365

  * [ _Enrol your child in primary school when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-primary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)

Information on choosing a primary school, how to apply for a school place,
receiving an offer and where to find help if you can’t find a suitable school.

577.2856

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

