**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Further education and training ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/) > Further Education and Training (FET) allowances

#  Further Education and Training (FET) allowances

  * Training allowances 
  * The FET training allowance 
  * FET training allowance rates 
  * How to apply for a FET course 

##  Training allowances

You may get a training allowance, if you take part in further education and
training. Training allowances vary widely from course to course, so check the
details of each course carefully.

You may get a training allowance, if you take part in one of the following
further education and training (FET) programmes:

**Apprenticeship** : You get an apprenticeship wage when you are training on-
the-job and an [ apprenticeship allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/apprenticeships/) when attending class.

**Youthreach** : You may keep your social welfare payment or get a [
Youthreach allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/youthreach/) .

**Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme (VTOS)** : You may keep your social
welfare payment or get a [ VTOS allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/returning-to-
education/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) .

On this page we provide information about the **FET training allowance** which
can be paid if you are on a course under one of the following programmes:

  * [ Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI) ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)
  * [ Traineeship ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)
  * [ Specific Skills Training (SST) ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)
  * [ Community Training Centres (CTCs) ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)

You will not get a FET training allowance, if you do a [ Post-Leaving
Certificate (PLC) course
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) . However, you may get a [ Back to
Education Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/back-to-education/back-to-education-
allowance/) or a [ SUSI maintenance grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) .

##  The FET training allowance

If you are getting a social welfare payment, you may keep your social welfare
payment or transfer to a FET training allowance, when you take part in any of
the following:

  1. Traineeship Programme - see below 
  2. Specific Skills Training - see below 
  3. Community Training Centre (CTC) - see below 
  4. Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI) - see below 

You will transfer to a FET training allowance if you are getting:

  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)

1\. [ The Traineeship Programme
](https://www.solas.ie/programmes/traineeship/trainees/) provides training and
work experience. The duration of the programme will depend on [ your area of
training ](https://www.solas.ie/programmes/traineeship/) . When your initial
training is completed, you move back and forth between the centre and the
employer's workplace, further developing your skills.

2\. [ Specific Skills Training ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)
allows people who have lost their job or who are changing job to learn new
job-related skills. There are [ short and long day courses, online courses,
blended learning and evening courses
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/types) .

  * The courses vary from centre to centre and from year to year with different levels of certification. 
  * The courses are run during the day and in the evenings. 
  * Priority on daytime courses is given to unemployed people. A day course is free to all unemployed people, even if you are not getting a social welfare payment. 
  * An evening course is not free unless you are getting a social welfare payment. 

3\. [ Community Training Centres (CTCs)
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) are independent community-
based organisations, which provide training and education for early school
leavers, primarily aged between 16 and 21. Courses are generally for one year
and are full-time and lead to major awards on the [ National Framework of
Qualifications ](https://nfq.qqi.ie/) (NFQ) at Levels 3 and 4.

If you are aged under 18 and attending a Community Training Centre you will
get an age-related training allowance – see below.

4\. [ The Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI)
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) is for people who are
unemployed and experiencing difficulty in gaining entry to the labour market.
It is primarily for people aged 18 – 35. Courses are full-time and lead to
major awards on the NFQ at Levels 3, 4 and 5.

##  FET training allowance rates

Your rate of FET training allowance will depend on your social welfare
payment.

You do not pay tax on a FET allowance.

###  **If you are getting a Jobseeker's Allowance or Supplementary Welfare
Allowance**

If you are aged 25 or over and getting Jobseeker's Allowance (JA) or
Supplementary Welfare Allowance (SWA), your payment is suspended, but you will
get an FET training allowance of the same amount.

If you are getting a reduced age-related Jobseeker's Allowance your payment is
suspended, but you will get a FET training allowance of €232. Any means that
were deducted from your Jobseeker’s Allowance will also be deducted from your
FET training allowance. This also applies to people getting a reduced age-
related basic Supplementary Welfare Allowance.

However, if you are aged under 18 and attending a Community Training Centre,
you will continue to get an age-related training allowance – see ’Weekly FET
training allowance rates’ below.

If your entitlement to Jobseeker's Allowance or Supplementary Welfare
Allowance stops during the FET course, your FET training allowance will stop.

###  **If you are getting Jobseeker's Benefit**

If you are getting [ Jobseeker's Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) , your social welfare payment
will stop and you will get a FET training allowance of the same amount.

If you do not find employment when your course ends, you can re-apply for
Jobseeker’s Benefit. Your Jobseeker’s Benefit [ claim may be linked
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e95f88-operational-guidelines-jobseekers-
benefit/#waiting-days-and-claim-linking) to your previous claim for
Jobseeker’s Benefit. This means that your claim is not treated as a new claim.

###  **If you are getting Disability Allowance or Blind Pension**

Your [ Disability Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
or [ Blind Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
is suspended but you will get a FET training allowance of the same amount. The
rules that apply to your original social welfare payment also apply to your
FET training allowance. You must inform social welfare of any changes to your
circumstances.

You will also keep any secondary benefits, such as your medical card or travel
pass.

If you have a disability, the Education and Training Board will apply flexible
sick leave arrangements if necessary.

###  **If you are getting Illness Benefit or Invalidity Pension**

You will not get an FET training allowance, but you will keep your [ Illness
Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/disability-benefit/) or [ Invalidity Pension
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) . (However, you must get
permission from the Department of Social Protection before you to do the FET
course).

The rules that apply to your social welfare payment will continue to apply
while you are on the FET course. You will keep your secondary benefits.

###  **If you are getting a One-Parent Family Payment**

You will not get a FET training allowance, but you will keep your [ One-Parent
Family Payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) .

###  **If your adult dependant is on a FET course**

If you are getting an [ Increase for a Qualified Adult
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) for your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant as part of your social welfare payment, you can continue to get
this while your adult dependant is participating on a course. Your adult
dependant will not get a FET training allowance. However, they may qualify for
travel and other allowances. Check with the course provider if these
allowances are available with their course.

###  Accommodation and travel allowance

You may get an extra accommodation allowance or travel allowance. An
accommodation allowance is paid if you need to live away from home for the
duration of the course. A travel allowance can be paid if you live 3 miles or
more from the course centre.

Check with the course provider if these allowances are available with their
course.

Weekly training allowances are as follows:

**FET training allowance** |  **Rate per week (full-time)**  
---|---  
Jobseeker's Allowance or SWA (aged 25 and over)  |  Same rate as your social welfare payment   
Jobseeker's Allowance or SWA (under 25)  |  €232  If your social welfare payment is more than this amount, you will get the same rate as your social welfare payment.   
Jobseeker's Benefit  |  Same rate as your social welfare payment   
One-Parent Family Payment or Illness Benefit or Invalidity Pension  or Farm Assist or Fish Assist  |  Keep your existing social welfare payment   
Disability Allowance  |  Same rate as your social welfare payment   
Aged 16-17 and no social welfare payment  |  €45   
  
If you are getting one of the social welfare payments listed below, you will
not get a FET training allowance. However, you will continue to get your
social welfare payment.

  * Invalidity Pension 
  * Illness Benefit 
  * One-Parent Family Payment 
  * Farm Assist 
  * Fish Assist 

##  How to apply for a FET course

To apply for a place on a FET course, you should contact the course provider.

For some courses you may need to register with your [ local employment
services office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/d6f636-employment-services-
offices/) or [ Intreo centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) . You will
be interviewed in order to identify the course that will best suit your needs.

Due to the pressure on some courses, you may not get a place immediately on
the course of your choice. For more information about available training
courses, [ contact your ETB Training Centre
](https://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) .

You can find more information about further education and training courses on
[ fetchcourses.ie ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/) .  

_**Page edited:** 11 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-allowances/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Further%20Education%20and%20Training%20%28FET%29%20allowances&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-allowances/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-allowances/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Further%20Education%20and%20Training%20%28FET%29%20allowances&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-allowances/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Further education and training (FET) courses_ ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-courses/)

Find out about further education and training, how to find a course and the
support you can get.

3146.0916

  * [ _Education, Training and Development Option_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/education-training-and-development-option/)

You can take part in certain short education, training or development courses
and keep your jobseeker's payment. Find out more.

1805.9778

  * [ _Further and higher education qualifications_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/colleges-and-qualifications/fet-qualifications/)

The system of validation of qualifications in further and higher education.

1354.7096

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

