**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Industrial relations and trade unions
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-
trade-unions/) > Employment agreements and orders

#  Employment agreements and orders

  * What are employment agreements and orders? 
  * Employment Regulation Orders 
  * Registered Employment Agreements 
  * Sectoral Employment Orders 
  * More information 

##  What are employment agreements and orders?

Employees in a particular sector (such as construction or security), and
workers who are represented by a trade union, sometimes have their working
conditions set out in a particular _employment agreement_ or _employment
order_ .

Type of employment agreement or order  |  What it means for you   
---|---  
[ Employment Regulation Order ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-wages/employment%20regulation%20orders/) (ERO)  |  An ERO sets the minimum rates of pay and conditions for workers in a specified business sector.  The order is drawn up by a [ Joint Labour Committee ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/joint-labour-committees/) and signed into law by the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment.  Read more about EROs below.   
[ Registered Employment Agreement ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-wages/registered%20employment%20agreements/) (REA)  |  An REA is a collective agreement between a trade union and an employer. It covers the pay or employment conditions of specified workers.  An REA is registered with the Labour Court and is only binding on the parties that subscribed to it (such as the worker, employer and trade union).  Read more about REAs below.   
[ Sectoral Employment Order ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-wages/sectoral%20employment%20orders/) (SEO)  |  An SEO is made following a recommendation from the Labour Court on pay, pension or sick pay scheme for workers in a particular sector.  When the Minister signs an SEO, the Labour Court’s recommendations become law.  Read more about SEOs below.   
  
If you are covered by an employment agreement or order, the details may be
included in your [ contract of employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) .

##  Employment Regulation Orders

An [ Employment Regulation Order (ERO)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-
wages/employment%20regulation%20orders/) sets the minimum rates of pay and
conditions of employment for workers in a particular sector.

There are currently 3 EROs in operation, including for the:

  * [ Contract cleaning sector ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/255/made/en/print) (effective since 1 June 2024) 
  * [ Security sector ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/legislation/legislation-files/si-no-319-of-2024.pdf) (effective since 1 July 2024) 
  * [ Early learning and childcare sector ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/296/made/en/print) (effective since 24 June 2024) 

Employers must pay the wage rates and provide the employment conditions set
out in the ERO. They cannot give less favourable wages or conditions than
those in the ERO.

If your employment conditions are covered by an ERO, there must be a notice on
display in the workplace, explaining the terms of the ERO.

You can report any breaches of an ERO to the [ Workplace Relations Commission
(WRC)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/complaints_disputes/refer_a_dispute_make_a_complaint/)
.

###  **EROs and minimum wage**

Even if the hourly pay rates are set out in an Employment Regulation Order
(ERO), an employer must pay their employees at least the legal [ minimum wage
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-wage/) .

###  How an ERO comes into effect

The ERO proposal is drawn up by a [ Joint Labour Committee (JLC)
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-
trade-unions/joint-labour-committees/) . The JLC can be set up to agree on
rates of pay and conditions of employment for vulnerable workers in sectors
that are not otherwise represented.

Then, the JLC’s proposal must be adopted by the Labour Court. If adopted by
the Labour Court, the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment will sign
an ‘Order’, giving the proposal statutory effect.

##  Registered Employment Agreements

A Registered Employment Agreement (REA) is a _collective agreement_ between a
trade union and an employer. It can also be an agreement between multiple
unions and multiple employers (or an employers’ organisation). The agreement
is reached through _collective bargaining_ , which means each side voluntarily
engages in the negotiations.

An REA sets out the pay and employment conditions of the workers covered in
the agreement.

Once an REA is registered with the Labour Court, it becomes binding
(compulsory) for the parties involved (for example, the worker, employer and
trade union).

All REAs must include a disputes procedure, which all parties to the agreement
must keep to. You can refer any breaches of an REA to the [ Workplace
Relations Commission
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/complaints_disputes/refer_a_dispute_make_a_complaint/)
.

The law on REAs is set out in the [ Industrial Relations (Amendment) Act 2015
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2015/act/27/revised/en/html) .

The Labour Court keeps a [ register of employment agreements
](https://www.labourcourt.ie/en/publications/registers/) , as required by [
Section 8
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2015/act/27/revised/en/html#SEC8) of
the Act.

##  Sectoral Employment Orders

A Sectoral Employment Order (SEO) can set the pay, pension or sick pay scheme
for workers in a particular sector, such as construction. The law on SEOs is
set out in the [ Industrial Relations (Amendment) Act 2015
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2015/act/27/revised/en/html) .

The SEO has a dispute resolution procedure. It requires employees to raise
individual disputes with their employer, at local level, first. The employer
must respond within 5 working days. If it is not resolved, the dispute can be
referred to the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC). WRC decisions can be
appealed to the Labour Court.

###  SEOs currently in place

The [ Sectoral Employment Order (Mechanical Engineering Building Services
Contracting Sector) 2018 (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/si_59_of_2018_sectoral_employment_order.pdf)
sets the statutory minimum rates of pay for workers employed in the Mechanical
Engineering Building Services Contracting sector. It also sets other
conditions, for example, sick pay and pension entitlements.

The [ Sectoral Employment Order (Construction Sector) 2023
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2023/si/207/made/en/print) came into
operation on 18 September 2023 and was [ updated on 5 August 2024
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-
wages/sectoral%20employment%20orders/construction-sector/construction-
sector.html) . The order fixes the statutory minimum rates of pay for
craftspeople, construction operatives and apprentices employed in the
construction sector. It also sets other conditions, for example, sick pay and
pension entitlements.

###  How an SEO comes into effect

An SEO begins as a request to the Labour Court to review issues such as the
pay, pension or sick pay scheme for workers in a particular sector.

The request to the Labour Court can be made separately or jointly by
organisations that **substantially** represent employers or workers, such as a
trade union.

Then, the Labour Court can recommend the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and
Employment to make an SEO. When the Minister signs an SEO, the Labour Court’s
recommendations become legally binding across the sector.

##  More information

You can get more information on the Workplace Relations Commission website
about:

  * [ Employment Regulation Orders ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-wages/employment%20regulation%20orders/)
  * [ Registered Employment Agreements ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-wages/registered%20employment%20agreements/)
  * [ Sectoral Employment Orders ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-wages/sectoral%20employment%20orders/)

You can also [ contact the WRC’s information and customer service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Conciliation and Mediation Services

Lansdowne House  
Lansdowne Road  
Dublin 4  
D04 A3A8

**Tel:** (01) 613 6700

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Fax:** (01) 613 6701

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 11 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-
agreements-and-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employment%20agreements%20and%20orders&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-
agreements-and-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-
agreements-and-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employment%20agreements%20and%20orders&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-
agreements-and-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Maintenance orders and agreements_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/)

What is maintenance and who has to pay it? If you can't reach an agreement,
how to apply for a maintenance order.

1412.5447

  * [ _Adjudication of employment rights disputes and complaints_ ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/adjudication-employment-rights-disputes-and-complaints/)

If you have a complaint about your employment rights, and you cannot resolve
it with your employer, you can complain to the Workplace Relations Commission.
Your complaint will be referred to either a mediation officer or an
adjudicator.

1314.2465

  * [ _Contract of employment_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/)

The law specifies that contracts of employment must contain certain details,
and your employer must give you your terms of employment in writing.

1251.9294

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

