**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Educational supports ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/educational-supports/) > Psychological assessment at school

#  Psychological assessment at school

  * What is a psychological assessment? 
  * How is a child selected for a psychological assessment? 
  * Who does the psychological assessment? 
  * Protection of your child's interests 
  * Who pays for a psychological assessment? 
  * How to apply for a psychological assessment 

##  What is a psychological assessment?

A psychological assessment can help find out if your child has special needs
at school.

The school will involve a psychologist only after they have considered the
child’s needs.

If your child has learning, emotional or behavioural difficulties, the school
your child attends is responsible for getting an assessment of your child’s
needs. The assessment will help the school to plan your child’s education and
remedial intervention.

You can read about the process schools use to consider the [ special education
needs of a child ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/) .

**Pilot counselling programme in primary schools**

The Department of Education has set up a [ pilot counselling programme to a
small number of primary schools in 7 counties
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/61be8-counselling-in-primary-schools-
pilot-cps-p-2023-2025/) . The counselling service provided under the pilot
programme is not a substitute for the HSE Primary Care Psychology service or
CAMHS. It does not replace NEPS within a school. School staff with the support
of NEPS can refer children to the service for up to 6 counselling sessions.
This will be done in consultation and with the consent of parents, but parents
cannot refer their child directly to the programme. There is more [
information for children about the counselling programme
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/276756/73d10a43-0d6b-44ad-b00f-3ccbb423c466.pdf#page=null)
and [ information for parents about the counselling programme
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/276758/5d624114-17da-4224-9c50-e914af8e0ba0.pdf#page=null)
.

##  How is a child selected for a psychological assessment?

###

If a teacher thinks that your child has difficulty coping with the normal
curriculum, you should be made aware of this.

Before getting a psychological assessment for a child, school staff should
consider supplementary teaching.

If the school decides that an assessment is needed for your child, the
principal or teacher should arrange a meeting with you as the parent or legal
guardian.

The reasons for the assessment should be discussed and each section of the
consent form for [ psychological assessment - form 1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/41788/9f0a90d1dbdf426bad660fee65c7981e.pdf) explained
before you are asked to sign the form.

Psychologists who carry out assessments must meet with you, explain their
findings and give you a copy of the psychological report.

Psychological assessments in schools are provided by the [ National
Educational Psychological Service (NEPS)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/) .

You can get a [ NEPS information leaflet for parents (pdf).
](https://assets.gov.ie/41219/9407bf80d6f54e4c85732884fb535490.pdf)

##  Who does the psychological assessment?

The [ National Educational Psychological Service (NEPS)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/) provides psychological services
in public and private primary and post-primary schools and in related
educational centres.

You can read more about NEPS services in the booklet [ Working Together to
Make a Difference to Children (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/41219/9407bf80d6f54e4c85732884fb535490.pdf) on gov.ie.

NEPS is located in 8 regions. It works with schools to:

  * Engage in individual casework with children and young people 
  * Provide a consultation service for teachers and parents 
  * Participate in school-based projects relevant to educational psychology 
  * Promote mental health in schools 

If your school does not have a service from NEPS they can use the Scheme for
Commissioning Psychological Assessment (SCPA).

###  What is the Scheme for Commissioning Psychological Assessments (SCPA)

If your school is not located in a region with a NEPS service, they can use
the Scheme for Commissioning Psychological Assessment (SCPA).

The SCPA helps schools to meet the urgent need for psychological advice while
the NEPS service is being expanded to all schools. Only psychologists named in
the current list are eligible to carry out work under the SCPA scheme. You can
read further information on the [ Scheme for Commissioning Psychological
Assessments (SCPA) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/#scheme-for-
the-commissioning-of-psychological-assessments-scpa) .

##  Protection of your child's interests

Psychological assessment services are in place so that children with special
learning needs can take advantage of the necessary resources. However, some
children will be nervous at the thought of meeting a psychologist. If a child
is aware that they have difficulties at school, the prospect of a meeting with
a psychologist may confirm to them a perceived weakness. For this reason, a
school should only commission an individual assessment if, having spoken with
the child's parents, it is absolutely convinced that the result will benefit
the child.

NEPS provides [ advice on whether you should tell your child
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/#information-for-parents) that
their learning needs will be assessed by a psychologist.

For the protection of your child's confidentiality, they are referred to by
their initials only in all documentation submitted by school authorities to
NEPS.

All psychologists on the NEPS panel must have obtained Garda clearance. It is
also recommended that a member of the school staff look in on the assessment
interview once or twice.

In general, an assessment should be carried out in your child's school, where
the surroundings are familiar. A separate room in the main building and near
the school office is an ideal venue.

##  Who pays for a psychological assessment?

NEPS makes a payment directly to the psychologist. NEPS does not reimburse
schools or parents for assessments.

NEPS cannot reimburse you if you are a parent who has commissioned a private
psychological assessment. In this case, you can claim [ tax relief on medical
expenses ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-
medical-expenses/) after the year has ended. You can get more information on [
Revenue’s website ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/Home.aspx) .

##  How to apply for a psychological assessment

Children are normally referred to NEPS through the school principal. You
should discuss any concerns regarding learning difficulties with school
personnel first. If you have questions about the NEPS service and assessments,
you should make them directly to school personnel.

In general, you apply for NEPS services through the school principal of your
child's school.

###  National Educational Psychological Service

Marlborough Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 RC96  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 889 2700

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5ef45c-neps/)

**Email:** [ neps@education.gov.ie ](mailto:neps@education.gov.ie)

You can find contact information for the [ NEPS offices in Ireland (pdf)
](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/42216/a099e1bbae0041f2950becf6ee53cf09.pdf) .

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/psychological-assessment-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Psychological%20assessment%20at%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/psychological-assessment-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/psychological-assessment-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Psychological%20assessment%20at%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/psychological-assessment-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1418.6416

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1330.041

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

1301.7368

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

