**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Equality in work ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/) > Bullying at work

#  Bullying at work

  * What is bullying? 
  * Types of bullying 
  * Employer’s obligations to prevent bullying 
  * What to do if you are bullied at work 
  * How to make an informal complaint 
  * How to make a formal complaint 
  * Taking your complaint further 
  * More information 

##  What is bullying?

Bullying is _repeated inappropriate behaviour_ that undermines your right to
dignity at work. An isolated incident is not considered to be bullying, it
usually takes place over a period of time. Bullying can be done by one or more
people and can be aimed at an individual or a group.

The terms bullying and harassment are different. A behaviour can be considered
to be either bullying or harassment but not both. You can get more information
about [ harassment at work ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/harassment-at-
work/) .

By law, employers must prevent improper conduct or behaviour, which includes
bullying. A summary of your employer’s anti-bullying policy should be
displayed prominently within the workplace.

The Health and Safety Authority (HSA) works to ensure that workplace bullying
is not tolerated and it provides [ information and advice on bullying
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Workplace_Health/Bullying_at_Work/Bullying_-
_Employee_Perspective/) . The Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) offers a [
mediation service ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-
mediation/) to help resolve issues informally before a formal process is
initiated.

##  Types of bullying

Bullying can be direct or indirect, and can include verbal, physical or
cyberbullying. Cyberbullying is bullying that happens online. It can include
offensive and abusive messages. It also includes hacking into accounts or
spreading rumours online.

Bullying can take many different forms such as:

  * Social exclusion and isolation 
  * Verbal abuse and insults 
  * Being treated less favourably than colleagues in similar roles 
  * Belittling a person’s opinion 
  * Spreading malicious rumours, gossip or innuendo 
  * Intrusion - pestering, spying or stalking 
  * Intimidation and aggressive interactions 
  * Excessive monitoring of work 
  * Withholding information needed for the person to do their job properly 
  * Repeatedly manipulating a person’s job contents and targets 
  * Blaming a person for things beyond their control 
  * Use of aggressive or obscene language 
  * Other menacing behaviour 

An isolated incident of the above behaviour is not considered to be bullying.

Bullying can happen at all levels within an organisation and can be conducted
by customers, clients and business contacts.

##  Employer’s obligations to prevent bullying

Employers have a duty to ensure the health and safety of their employees in
the workplace. This is set out in the [ Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act
2005 (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2005/en/act/pub/0010/index.html) .

Under [ section 8
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2005/en/act/pub/0010/sec0008.html#partii-
chapi-sec8) of the Act your employer must “prevent any improper conduct or
behaviour likely to put the safety, health and welfare of employees at risk”.
This includes bullying.

###  Code of practice on the prevention and resolution of bullying

The [ Code of Practice for Employers and Employees on the Prevention and
Resolution of Bullying at Work (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/code-
of-practice-for-employers-and-employees-on-the-prevention-and-resolution-of-
bullying-at-work.pdf) is effective since 23 December 2020. The code sets out
detailed procedure for dealing with formal and informal complaints about
bullying.

####  Employer’s responsibilities

Under the Code, your employer must:

  * Take reasonable steps to prevent bullying in the workplace 
  * Have an anti-bullying policy for dealing with complaints of bullying (see [ Appendix 1 of the Code: How to prepare an anti-bullying policy ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/si/674/made/en/print) ) 
  * Develop the anti-bullying policy in consultation with employees 
  * Prepare a Safety Statement based on an assessment of the risk of bullying 

####  Employee’s responsibilities

Under the Code, you must:

  * Not engage in improper behaviour which would endanger the health, safety and welfare of yourself or the other employees 
  * Comply with relevant anti-bullying policies 
  * Co-operate with your employer when an allegation of bullying at work is being investigated 

##  What to do if you are bullied at work

You need to find out [ what to do if you feel you are being bullied.
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Workplace_Health/Bullying_at_Work/Are_you_being_Bullied/)

**Gather evidence**

If you think you are being bullied keep copies of any relevant supporting
information, like notes or emails. Check your employer’s policy on bullying
and harassment and follow the guidelines.

**Get advice**

Speak to someone about how you might deal with the problem. This could be a
friend or colleague, a designated person at work, a trade union representative
or your manager or supervisor.

You can get also get advice on your options from the [ National Anti-Bullying
Research and Resource Centre ](https://antibullyingcentre.ie/) or the [ HSA
Contact Centre ](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/contact_us/hsa_contact_centre/) .

**Try to resolve the issue informally**

Very often, an informal approach will resolve the issue. You should follow the
process set out below.

##  How to make an informal complaint

Your employer should deal with your complaint immediately. The company can
appoint a Contact Person to act as a first step for employees. The Contact
Person would not be involved in investigating the complaint.

###  Initial informal Process

You should begin by making it clear to the person that you find their
behaviour unacceptable and undermining. You could also put it in writing, if
you prefer. Focus on what they have done (offending acts) and the effects it
has on you.

Your employer may have a Contact Person named in the anti-bullying policy, who
can give you information on the process.

The person responsible for managing the complaint should keep a brief written
record of the issue and agreed outcomes and dates.

###  Secondary informal process

The secondary informal process can be used if the initial informal process is
not successful or your employer thinks it is not appropriate for the
seriousness of the complaint.

Your employer can nominate a separate person to investigate the complaint.
This person should not be the Contact Person. The nominated person should have
the appropriate training and experience and be familiar with the procedures.
They may be a supervisor, manager or someone in authority within your
organisation.

The nominated person responsible for managing the complaint should keep a
record of all stages of the investigation. You should check your employer’s
anti-bullying policy for the steps to follow under the secondary informal
process.

###  Mediation

The WRC provides a [ mediation service ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/workplace-mediation/) , if both parties agree to it. The Mediator's
Institute of Ireland (MII) have a list of accredited meditators that also
provide private workplace mediation services. You get more details from [
themii.ie ](https://www.themii.ie/about-mediation/sectors-of-
mediation/workplace-and-organisation/) . Mediation can help to resolve issues
informally before a formal process is initiated.

For more details on the informal process, see the [ Code of Practice for
Employers and Employees on the Prevention and Resolution of Bullying at Work
(pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/code-
of-practice-for-employers-and-employees-on-the-prevention-and-resolution-of-
bullying-at-work.pdf) .

If these informal approaches are not enough to resolve the issue and in
situations where the bullying continues, you may need to consider making a
formal complaint.

##  How to make a formal complaint

You should report the bullying to a manager.

Your employer's policy on bullying should clearly set out:

  * What will happen when a formal complaint is made 
  * How the complaint will be investigated 
  * Who will carry out the investigation taking into account issues of confidentiality and the rights of both parties 

The company’s investigator should meet with you and any witnesses or relevant
other people on a confidential basis. You can bring a work colleague or trade
union representative with you to this meeting. This applies to both the
complainant and the person complained of.

Your employer should keep records and copies of written statements should be
given to both parties.

###  Appealing the investigation

Your employer’s Anti-bullying policy should include an appeals process. It
should set out the time period for making an appeal. The person hearing the
appeal should have had no involvement in the investigation.

You should be supported during the formal complaints process. For example
through the Contact Person or advisory support services, where possible.

For more details on the formal and appeals processes, see the [ Code of
Practice for Employers and Employees on the Prevention and Resolution of
Bullying at Work (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/code-
of-practice-for-employers-and-employees-on-the-prevention-and-resolution-of-
bullying-at-work.pdf) .

##  Taking your complaint further

If you feel that your complaint about bullying has not been dealt with
properly by your employer, you may make a complaint under employment equality
or health and safety legislation to the Workplace Relations Commission.

You must use the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint)
. All complaints must be made within 6 months. This time limit can be
increased to 12 months if you can show there was a “reasonable cause” for the
delay.

**Unfair dismissal**

If the bullying becomes unbearable and you are forced to leave your job, you
may be entitled to claim [ constructive dismissal
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/constructive-
dismissal/) under the Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977-2015. This means that
although you left your job voluntarily, in reality you were forced to because
of the way you were being treated.

You should get legal advice about your rights before leaving your job. You may
make a claim to the Workplace Relations Commission, if you qualify under the
unfair dismissals legislation.

**Victimisation**

You cannot be [ penalised ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/victimisation-at-work/) (or punished) for bringing a claim under
employment equality, health and safety, or unfair dismissals legislation.

**Personal injury claim**

If the bullying at work is so great that it causes your physical or
psychological health to suffer or be affected, you may also be entitled to
bring a claim for compensation for personal injury.

You cannot look for compensation from your employer under the health and
safety legislation but you can make a personal injury claim through the [
Injuries Resolution Board ](/en/justice/civil-law/injuries-resolution-board/)
.

##  More information

You can get more information from the [ Health and Safety Authority
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Workplace_Health/Bullying_at_Work/) or the [
Workplace Relations Commission ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/) .

###  Code of practice on the prevention and resolution of bullying

The [ Code of Practice for Employers and Employees on the Prevention and
Resolution of Bullying at Work (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/code-
of-practice-for-employers-and-employees-on-the-prevention-and-resolution-of-
bullying-at-work.pdf) is effective since 23 December 2020. This code replaced
the HSA’s ‘Code of Practice for Employers and Employees on the Prevention and
Resolution of Bullying at Work’ and the LRC (now WRC) ‘Code of Practice
Detailing Procedures for Addressing Bullying in the Workplace’.

The Code sets out the responsibilities and the roles of the HSA and the WRC.
It gives guidance for employees, employers and trade unions on dealing with an
informal and formal bullying complaint in the workplace.

###  Health and Safety Authority

The Metropolitan Building  
James Joyce Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 K0Y8

**Opening Hours:** Lines are open on Monday to Fridays 9am - 3pm

**Tel:** (01) 614 7000

**Locall:** 0818 289 389

**Fax:** (01) 614 7020

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hsa.ie ](https://www.hsa.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/)

**Email:** [ wcu@hsa.ie ](mailto:wcu@hsa.ie)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 22 February 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/equality-
in-work/bullying-at-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Bullying%20at%20work&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/equality-
in-work/bullying-at-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/equality-
in-work/bullying-at-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Bullying%20at%20work&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/equality-
in-work/bullying-at-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Surveillance at work_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/surveillance-in-the-workplace/)

You have a right to privacy at work. There are rules your employer must follow
if monitoring your internet use or emails at work or using CCTV in the
workplace.

1472.6855

  * [ _Harassment at work_ ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/harassment-at-work/)

The law protects employees from harassment and sexual harrassment at work.
Find out how the law protects you and what to do if you are being subjected to
one or more of these types of harassment.

1461.7529

  * [ _Health and safety at work_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-work/)

Employers' responsibilities to employees regarding health and safety measures
in the workplace.

1437.602

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

