**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Irish education system ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/) >
Measures to address educational disadvantage

#  Measures to address educational disadvantage

  * Educational disadvantage 
  * Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS) 
  * Schemes and programmes to reduce educational disadvantage 
  * Special projects for disadvantaged youth 
  * More information 

##  Educational disadvantage

Educational disadvantage is when some people get less out of the education
system than others.

Educational disadvantage is seen in many ways, often by poor levels of
participation or achievement in the formal education system.

Children may be disadvantaged, for example, because of:

  * Disability 
  * Ill health 
  * Literacy difficulties 
  * Poverty 

Read about some of the different supports available in schools:

  * [ Special educational needs ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-education-needs/special-education/)
  * [ Psychological assessment at school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/psychological-assessment-school/)
  * [ Financial help with going to school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/financial-help-with-school/)

##  Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS)

The Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS) programme aims to
reduce educational disadvantage. It is a Department of Education policy.

Under the DEIS programme, schools with the highest number of students at risk
of educational disadvantage get extra resources. A number of pre-existing
programmes were brought together under the DEIS framework.

The [ DEIS Plan 2017 (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/24451/ba1553e873864a559266d344b4c78660.pdf)
sets out the Department of Education’s aims to improve opportunities for
people in communities at risk of disadvantage and social exclusion.

See the [ list of current DEIS schools ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-
information/4018ea-deis-delivering-equality-of-opportunity-in-schools/#deis-
schools-2023-2024) . Read more about the [ different supports available to
DEIS schools ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/4018ea-deis-
delivering-equality-of-opportunity-in-schools/#supports-to-deis-schools) on
Gov.ie.

##  Schemes and programmes to reduce educational disadvantage

###  **Early Start Pre-School Scheme**

[ Early Start ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-
education-and-childcare/early-start/) is a one-year preventative intervention
scheme for pre-school children (3 to 5 years old) who are at risk of not
reaching their potential in school. It is available in selected schools in
some disadvantaged areas.

###  **School Completion Programme**

The [ School Completion Programme ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/educational-
welfare-services/scp/) is aimed at children in primary and post-primary school
who are at risk of leaving school early, or who are out of school and haven’t
transferred to another learning site (for example, [ Youthreach
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/youthreach/) ).

The programme aims to help children:

  * Complete the [ Leaving Certificate ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/) , or 
  * Achieve a qualification at an equivalent level to the Leaving Certificate, or 
  * Achieve a suitable level of education that lets them continue into further education, training or employment 

The programme is funded [ by Tusla Education Support Services (TESS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/) .

###  **Home-School Community Liaison Scheme**

The [ Home-School Community Liaison Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/6c72da-home-school-community-liaison-scheme-
hscl/) aims to improve co-operation between home, schools and communities to
improve educational outcomes for disadvantaged children.

###  **Learning support teachers**

Learning support teachers give extra support to children with learning
difficulties, particularly in the areas of literacy and numeracy. Generally,
this support is provided through extra teaching in small groups or
individually. You can find [ guidelines for learning support teachers
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ebd0d3-learning-support-guidelines/) on
Gov.ie.

###  **School Meals Programme**

The [ School Meals Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/29a3ff-school-
meals-scheme/) funds schools to provide food to school children.

Since September 2023, the Hot School Meals Programme is available [ to all
DEIS primary schools ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/3d5f9-minister-
humphreys-announces-plans-for-roll-out-of-hot-school-meals-to-all-primary-
schools/) . In April 2024, it was expanded to many primary schools outside the
DEIS programme. You can read the [ list of schools approved for the Hot School
Meals Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/937b9-list-of-schools-
approved-for-the-hot-school-meals-programme-from-april-2024/) .

The programme has 2 schemes:

  * The Urban Scheme 
  * The Local Projects Scheme 

####  **The Urban Scheme**

The Urban Scheme supports school meals for primary schools in urban areas.
Local authorities are responsible for procuring food suppliers for schools on
this scheme. Meals under this scheme may include sandwiches, fruit and milk.

####  **The Local Projects Scheme**

The Local Projects Scheme gives funding directly to schools and groups that
operate their own school meals programme (the meals may be hot or cold).

Funding is given directly to:

  * Primary schools 
  * Secondary school 
  * Special schools 
  * Local groups 
  * Voluntary organisations 
  * Community based preschools 

Funding is allocated based on a [ rate per meal, per child, per day
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/29a3ff-school-meals-scheme/#rates-of-payment)
. Funding must be used only for food that meets [ certain nutrition standards
(pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/137751/e73efe75-cb05-43c7-bc01-916249f90380.pdf#page=null)
.

###  **Equal Start**

[ Equal Start ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/035a5-equal-start-for-
children-experiencing-disadvantage-a-major-new-model-of-government-funded-
supports-is-announced/) is a new scheme which aims to support disadvantaged
children in early learning and care and school-age childcare settings.

A Family Community Liaison role will be created, and funding will go towards
tailored supports for children as well as meals and staff time.

The targeted supports will be available to children who are:

  * In disadvantaged areas 
  * In the Traveller and Roma communities 
  * On the National Childcare Scheme through a sponsor body 
  * Experiencing homelessness 
  * In the International Protection system 

Equal Start will start rolling out from September 2024, and is expected to be
fully operational by 2028.

##  Special projects for disadvantaged youth

The following projects are aimed at young people in the second-level education
age group, but they are also relevant for some primary school students.

###  **UBU – Your Place Your Space**

[ UBU - Your Place Your Space ](https://ubu.gov.ie/about/youth-services/ubufo)
is a funding scheme providing out-of-school supports to help young people aged
10-24 realise their potential. It is funded by the Department of Children,
Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY).

The projects focus on the personal development and social education of young
people who are at risk of:

  * Drug abuse 
  * Juvenile crime 
  * Early school leaving 
  * Social exclusion 
  * Unemployment 
  * Welfare dependence 
  * [ Homelessness ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/homelessness/)
  * Marginalisation (for example, young carers; people from the LGBTI+ community; people with disabilities; and people from the Traveller or Roma communities) 

###  **Youth Information Centres**

The DCEDIY funds a network of [ Youth Information Centres and services
](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-
information-centres/) .

The centres give young people free and confidential information about careers,
education, employment matters, rights and entitlements, leisure, sport,
travel, and European opportunities.

###  **Youthreach**

[ Youthreach ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/youthreach/) provides opportunities for basic
education, personal development, vocational training and work experience to
early school leavers without any formal qualifications.

##  More information

The meaning of educational disadvantage is set out in the [ Education Act 1998
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0051/index.html) .

You can get more information on:

  * DEIS from the [ Social Inclusion Unit ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/6bb5d4-social-inclusion-unit/) of the Department of Education 
  * The School Completion Programme from your [ local SCP co-ordinator (pdf) ](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/SCP_Contact_details_by_county_2019.pdf)
  * The School Meals Scheme from [ your local authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) or [ the Department of Social Protection ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/29a3ff-school-meals-scheme/)
  * The [ nutrition standards for Hot School Meals (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/137751/e73efe75-cb05-43c7-bc01-916249f90380.pdf#page=null)
  * [ Foróige special youth projects ](https://www.foroige.ie/our-work/projects-services-and-programmes/special-youth-projects) funded by local [ Education and Training Boards (ETB) ](http://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/)

###  Social Inclusion Unit

The Department of Education  
Cornamaddy  
Athlone  
Westmeath  
Ireland

**Tel:** (090) 648 3600

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/6bb5d4-social-
inclusion-unit/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-
information/6bb5d4-social-inclusion-unit/)

###  School Meals Programme

Department of Social Protection

College Road  
Sligo  
Ireland

**Tel:** (071) 913 8625 or (071) 915 7100

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/29a3ff-school-meals-scheme/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/29a3ff-school-meals-scheme/)

_**Page edited:** 9 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/measures-to-address-educational-
disadvantage/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Measures%20to%20address%20educational%20disadvantage&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/measures-to-address-educational-
disadvantage/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/measures-to-address-educational-
disadvantage/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Measures%20to%20address%20educational%20disadvantage&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/measures-to-address-educational-
disadvantage/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)

Overview of the employment schemes and other supports which encourage people
getting unemployment and certain other social welfare payments to take up
employment.

886.4597

  * [ _Educational arrangements for Travellers_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/educational-arrangements-for-travellers/)

This document provides information on the arrangements in place for the
education of Traveller children

836.1094

  * [ _HEAR admissions scheme for students from disadvantaged backgrounds_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-admissions-scheme-for-students-from-disadvantaged-backgrounds/)

Higher Education Access Route (HEAR) is a scheme to improve access to college
for school leavers from disadvantaged backgrounds.

834.87476

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

