**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [ Types
of employment ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/) > Different types of
workers

#  Different types of workers

  * Introduction 
  * Employee or self-employed 
  * Types of employees 
  * Other types of workers 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

There are various types of workers, with different rights.

This page is a summary of the different employment categories and employment
rights.

You can use our page to [ understand your employment status
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/understanding-your-employment-status/) if it is not clear whether
you are an employee or self-employed.

##  Employee or self-employed

There is no special definition in the law that says who is an employee and who
is self-employed.

The decision on your employment status is reached by looking at:

  * What you do 
  * How you do it 
  * Written or verbal agreements between you and the business that pays you 

Knowing whether you are an employee or a contractor is important because it
affects taxes, [ social insurance (PRSI)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) , social welfare and
employment rights.

###  **Employee**

You are an employee if you have a _‘contract of service’_ (an employment
contract). Your employer controls when, where and how you work.

###  **Self-employed**

If you have a _‘contract for services’,_ often called a contractor, you are
self-employed. You normally run your own business and provide services for a
fee over a specific time.

The [ Code of Practice for Determining Employment Status 2021 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/code-of-practice-on-employment-status.pdf) sets out
detailed guidelines and criteria to clarify whether a person is an employee or
self-employed. You can read more about [ understanding your employment status
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/understanding-your-employment-status/) .  

##  Types of employees

As an employee, you have certain [ employment rights
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employee-rights-and-entitlements/) .
Some rights need you to work for a minimum time (known as a minimum period of
continuous service).

Below is a summary of the different types of employees.

###  Part-time employees

[ Part-time employees
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/employment-rights-of-part-time-workers/) have similar rights to
full-time employees and their rights are protected by law.

Sometimes a part-time employee must work a set minimum number of hours for a
specific period to get certain rights.

###  Fixed-term employees

A fixed-term employee is someone who has a contract that ends either:

  * On a specified date 
  * When a specific job or project is completed 
  * When a specific event occurs (for example, external funding ends) 

Generally, people employed on fixed-term contracts have the same rights as
other employees. There are also some extra legal protections for workers with
[ fixed-term contracts ](https://www.google.com/url?client=internal-element-
cse&cx=006414847141085406041:ntchszasfve&q=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/rights-of-fixed-term-
workers/&sa=U&ved=2ahUKEwjK8tHP85qBAxXzQkEhttps://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/rights-of-fixed-term-workers/) .

###  Casual workers

There is no exact definition for _casual workers_ in employment law. Casual
workers are usually on standby for work without set hours. Casual workers are
considered employees and are entitled to certain rights and protections.

Some legislation will apply, for example, the right to a payslip. For another
right, a set period of employment is needed. It will be unlikely that a casual
worker will have enough service to qualify. For example, you need 2 years of
service to be eligible for [ statutory redundancy
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/right-to-redundancy-pay/) .

###  Seasonal workers

Seasonal workers work for a short time, often in areas like farming or
tourism.

You must get paid at least the [ minimum wage
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-wage/) for all hours you work. You must
get extra pay if you work on Sundays. The WRC has more information on [
employment rights for seasonal workers
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/employment_types/seasonal-
workers/) .

###  Young workers

The law prevents children under age 16 from working, except in rare cases, for
example, to work on a film.

Children aged 14 and 15 can do light work but there are rules around working
during school term.

Young people (aged 16 to 18) can have jobs but there are rules about maximum
hours and night work.

You can read more about [ young workers’ rights
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/young-people-at-work/rights-of-young-workers/) and [ hours of work for
young people ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-work-
and-changing-job/young-people-at-work/working-hours-rest-breaks-young-people/)
.

###  Agency workers

An [ agency worker ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/agency-workers/) (sometimes called ‘temps’ ) works for an agency
and gets placed with another person or company.

Temporary agency workers don’t have all the same employment rights as regular
workers but you must be treated the same way in basic work conditions. This
means you must be treated as if you had been directly recruited by the hirer
when it comes to working hours, rest periods, night work, annual leave, public
holidays and pay.

For some employment and equality legislation, the party who pays your wages
will normally be considered your employer.

However, under [ unfair dismissal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) legislation, your employer is the
person or company who you work for and not the agency. They are also
responsible for ensuring your safety in the workplace.

##  Other types of workers

Newer work arrangements have emerged that can make it difficult to tell
whether a worker is an employee or self-employed.

###  **Gig workers**

Many workers in the gig economy work as independent contractors or self-
employed persons. However, each individual arrangement is different and
sometimes gig economy workers are misclassified as self-employed when they are
employees.

[ Legal tests ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/understanding-your-employment-status/#c3d106) determine the work
status of gig workers, based on the real nature of your working relationship.

###  **Company owners**

If you own or control 50% or more of the company’s shareholding where you are
employed, you are generally not considered an employee of that company for
PRSI purposes. Instead, you are classified as self-employed and must pay PRSI
at Class S.

##  More information

You can get detailed guidelines and criteria that clarify whether a person is
an employee or self-employed in the [ Code of Practice for Determining
Employment Status 2021 ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/code-of-practice-on-employment-status.pdf) .

  

_**Page edited:** 25 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/different-types-of-workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Different%20types%20of%20workers&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/different-types-of-workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/different-types-of-workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Different%20types%20of%20workers&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/different-types-of-workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

2121.6975

  * [ _Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)

There are 3 different ways to legally marry in Ireland.

1926.7932

  * [ _Types of employment permits_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/overview-employment-permits/)

Under the Employment Permits (Amendment) Act 2014 there are 9 types of
employment permit. Find out more about the different types of permit.

1647.176

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

