**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/) >
Problems getting your redundancy pay

#  Problems getting your redundancy pay

  * What to do if you have trouble getting your redundancy pay 
  * What is the Redundancy Payment Scheme? 
  * Steps for employers who can't pay redundancy 
  * If your employer is insolvent 
  * If your employer refuses to pay 
  * More information 

##  What to do if you have trouble getting your redundancy pay

Your employer should pay the redundancy lump sum to you when your employment
ends. For example, this could be the last day of your notice period or on your
next pay day.

Contact your employer if you don’t get your statutory redundancy pay when you
are entitled to it. Do this in writing to make sure there is a record. You can
apply to your employer using form [ RP77 (pdf)
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/Claim_by_an_Employee_Against_an_Employer_for_a_Lump_Sum_or_Part_of_a_Lump_Sum_RP77_.pdf)
.

You must apply to your employer for redundancy pay within one year from the
date your employment ends.

If your employer cannot pay or they are insolvent, you can apply to get the
payment from the Government under the [ Redundancy Payment Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/78213a-redundancy-
payments/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Guide-to-the-Redundancy-
Payments-Scheme.aspx) .

##  What is the Redundancy Payment Scheme?

The Redundancy Payment Scheme is where your statutory redundancy payment is
paid by the Department of Social Protection (DSP) from the Social Insurance
Fund. This happens when your employer is genuinely unable to pay statutory
entitlements because of financial difficulties or insolvency.

The Redundancy Payment Scheme ensures you receive your statutory entitlements.

Once a payment has been made by DSP under the Redundancy Payment Scheme, a
debt will be raised against the employer.

##  Steps for employers who can't pay redundancy

If your employer is unable to pay your redundancy lump sum, they can apply to
the [ Redundancy Payments Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/78213a-redundancy-
payments/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Guide-to-the-Redundancy-
Payments-Scheme.aspx) .

Your employer should follow the steps below:

  1. Log on to the [ Welfare Partners service ](https://www.welfarepartners.ie/Account/Login) . To access the service, the employer will need a [ Department of Social Protection Sub-Cert from Revenue (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/47927/?page=null) . 
  2. Complete and submit an online application form (previously the RP50 form). 
  3. Download the completed Employee Declaration Form and send it to the employee by either email or post. 
  4. Upload confirmation from the employee that the Employee Declaration Form is correct. This should be a physical or digital signature or an email from the employee confirming the information is correct. 
  5. Upload the ‘Required’ documents and ‘Optional’ documents. 
  6. Review the declaration in the ‘Application summary’ and ‘Submit application’. 

Employers can get detailed information on [ how to access Welfare Partners and
use this service in the Employers Guide (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/139503/2e29286e-7528-48a2-9789-2f063317c4ce.pdf#page=null)
.

##  If your employer is insolvent

If your employer is in financial difficulty or becomes insolvent a liquidator,
receiver or examiner may be appointed by the courts.

They will take the place of your employer and deal with any outstanding
entitlements.

If there is no money to make redundancy payments, they will apply on your
behalf to the Redundancy Payments Section.

They do this using the [ Welfare Partners service
](https://www.welfarepartners.ie/Account/Login) . There is detailed
information on [ how to access Welfare Partners and use this service in the
Employer Representative Guide (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/139502/ffe1cd53-c2c8-43e4-a387-264ddc90f230.pdf#page=null)
.

##  If your employer refuses to pay

If your employer refuses to pay your statutory redundancy payment or there is
a dispute about redundancy, you can apply to bring a claim to the [ Workplace
Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-
relations-commission/) .

You must use the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
available on workplacerelations.ie. This must be done within one year of the
end of your employment. The WRC can extend the time limit to 2 years in
exceptional cases.

###  **Apply for redundancy a** fter the WRC decision

The WRC will make a decision on your complaint. If the [ WRC adjudicator
](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/adjudication-employment-rights-
disputes-and-complaints/) finds in your favour, you can apply for your lump
sum directly to the Department of Social Protection (DSP) for payment under
the Redundancy Payments Scheme.

Follow these steps to apply:

  1. Email [ redundancypayments@welfare.ie ](mailto:redundancypayments@welfare.ie) to request an application form (RP50). 
  2. Complete the RP50 form and sign it. 
  3. Send the signed RP50 form to the Redundancy and Insolvency Section of the DSP along with a copy of the WRC decision. You must send your claim within 52 weeks of a WRC decision being made. 

##  More information

You can get more information about the [ Redundancy Payments Scheme
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Guide-to-the-Redundancy-Payments-Scheme.aspx)
on gov.ie or from the Workplace Relations Commission's [ Information and
Customer Services
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Workplace_Relations_Services/Info_Cust_Serv/)
.

For information on the status of a claim for a redundancy lump sum or rebate
which has been submitted for payment, contact the Redundancy and Insolvency
Payments

Unit in DSP by email at [ redundancypayments@welfare.ie
](mailto:redundancypayments@welfare.ie) . Include as much information as
possible so DSP can help you.

###  The laws on redundancy

The laws on redundancy are set out in the [ Redundancy Payments Acts 1967–2014
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1967/act/21/front/revised/en/html) .

###  Redundancy Payments Section

Department of Social Protection

Ground Floor  
Gandon House  
Amiens Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 A361

**Tel:** (01) 673 4500 or 0818 111 112

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/78213a-redundancy-payments/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/78213a-redundancy-payments/)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 27 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Problems%20getting%20your%20redundancy%20pay&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Problems%20getting%20your%20redundancy%20pay&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet on calculating your redundancy payment_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/worksheet-on-calculating-your-redundancy-payment/)

Your redundancy lump sum is calculated according a certain formula based on
your years of service in an employment. This worksheet is to help you work it
out for yourself.

2731.57

  * [ _Do I have a right to redundancy pay?_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/right-to-redundancy-pay/)

If you lose your job you may be eligible for redundancy pay. This page
summarises the rules on qualifying for a redundancy payment.

1823.8005

  * [ _Getting a Building Energy Rating for your home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/)

An outline of how and why to get a Building Energy Rating (BER) for your home.

1820.2627

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

