**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/) >
Redundancy notice periods

#  Redundancy notice periods

  * How long should my notice period be? 
  * How your employer should give you notice 
  * My employer says I do not have to work my notice 
  * Can I leave my job before the notice period ends? 
  * Taking time off to look for a new job 
  * Taking holidays in your notice period 
  * Getting notice after a lay-off or short-time work 
  * Making a complaint about notice or pay 
  * More information 

##  How long should my notice period be?

If you are being made [ redundant ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/what-is-redundancy/) , your job won’t end straight away.
By law, you are entitled to a minimum paid notice period.

Your notice period goes up depending on how long you worked for your employer
– your _period of service_ .

**Notice periods for redundancy** **Period of service** |  **Minimum notice**  
---|---  
Between 13 weeks and 2 years  |  1 week   
Between 2-5 years  |  2 weeks   
Between 5-10 years  |  4 weeks   
Between 10-15 years  |  6 weeks   
Over 15 years  |  8 weeks   
  
For example, if you have worked for your employer for 5 years and 3 months you
get 4 weeks' notice.

##  How your employer should give you notice

Your employer should give you notice of redundancy **in writing** when they
tell you they are making you redundant.

The notice must give you the date your employment will end ( _date of
termination_ ).

Your notice period only starts when your employer gives you this notice and a
finishing date. Your notice period does not start from when your employer
tells you that you are at risk of redundancy.

##  My employer says I do not have to work my notice

You still get the same paid notice if your employer says you do not have to
work your notice period.

Not having to work your notice period could mean either:

  * You are paid as usual until the end of your notice period, but you do not have to work 
  * You get all your notice pay at once and your employment ends straight away (called ‘pay in lieu of notice’) 

Your employer will tell you if they are giving you pay in lieu of notice or
simply paying you as normal to the end of your notice period.

##  Can I leave my job before the notice period ends?

You may want to leave your job before the notice period ends, for example if
you get another job.

If you want to leave your job before the end of your notice period, you must
complete form [ RP6 (pdf)
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/Notice_to_an_Employer_by_an_Employee_to_Terminate_Employment_RP6_.pdf)
and give it to your employer.

Your employer can decide whether or not to allow you to leave in the notice
period.

If your employer does not agree and you leave during the notice period, it may
affect your [ entitlement to a redundancy payment
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/right-to-redundancy-
pay/) .

##  Taking time off to look for a new job

If you are being made redundant, you are [ entitled by law
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1979/en/act/pub/0007/sec0007.html#zza7y1979s7)
, to paid time off during your last 2 weeks of notice to look for a new job.
Your employer can ask for proof that you’re using the time off to find a new
job.

##  Taking holidays in your notice period

You are entitled to take any outstanding holidays ( [ annual leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-
leave/) ).

If you cannot take your holidays during the notice period, you are entitled to
payment _in lieu of_ (instead of) holidays.

##  Getting notice after a lay-off or short-time work

If you have been [ laid off or put on short-time work
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/lay-off-short-time-
working-and-redundancy/) , this means that your contract of employment is
temporarily suspended.

If your employer then decides to make you redundant, they must re-activate
your contract to make you redundant. When your employer gives notice of
redundancy, you are entitled to the full notice period.

##  Making a complaint about notice or pay

If you have a complaint or dispute about your notice or pay during the notice
period, you should begin by trying to sort it informally with your employer.

If you are unable to resolve the complaint informally, you can make a
complaint to the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC).

You must use the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint)
. All complaints must be made within 6 months. This time limit can be
increased to 12 months if you can show there was a “reasonable cause” for the
delay.

##  More information

You can get more information about your employment rights from the [ Workplace
Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-
relations-commission/) . You can contact their Information and Customer
service – see below.

###  The laws on redundancy

The laws on redundancy are set out in the [ Redundancy Payments Acts
1967–2014.
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1967/act/21/front/revised/en/html)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 2 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-notice-
periods/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Redundancy%20notice%20periods&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-notice-
periods/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-notice-
periods/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Redundancy%20notice%20periods&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-notice-
periods/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet on calculating your redundancy payment_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/worksheet-on-calculating-your-redundancy-payment/)

Your redundancy lump sum is calculated according a certain formula based on
your years of service in an employment. This worksheet is to help you work it
out for yourself.

993.43945

  * [ _Problems getting your redundancy pay_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-pay/)

Your employer should pay the redundancy lump sum to you when your employment
ends. Get advice if you are having problems getting your redundancy pay.

959.2444

  * [ _Cookie notice_ ](/en/about/cookies/)

The Cookie notice gives information about cookies used on
citizensinformation.ie and how you can manage your cookie preferences.

956.14655

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

