**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Other types of leave from work

#  Other types of leave from work

  * Taking time off work 
  * Force majeure leave 
  * Leave for medical care 
  * Compassionate leave 
  * Jury service 
  * Career break or study leave 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * More information 

##  Taking time off work

There are different reasons you might need time off work, for example:

  * If you have a family crisis, like a sudden illness in your family 
  * If you are called for jury service 
  * If you want to take study leave or a career break 

In some cases, you are entitled to be paid for your leave, but in others you
are not.

You may also want to read about types of statutory leave from work, including:

  * [ Annual leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-leave/)
  * [ Public holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-holidays/)
  * [ Sick leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/)
  * [ Maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/)
  * [ Paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/)
  * [ Adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/)
  * [ Carer’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/)
  * [ Parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/)
  * [ Parent's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/)
  * [ Leave for medical care ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/)
  * [ Domestic violence leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/domestic-violence-leave/)

##  Force majeure leave

If you have a family crisis, you have a right to limited time off work. This
is called _force majeure leave_ .

You may need to take force majeure leave for an urgent family reason, such as
the unexpected injury or illness of a ‘close family member’.

A _close family member_ includes:

  * Your child (including an adopted child) 
  * Your spouse or partner 
  * Your parent or grandparent 
  * Your sibling 
  * Someone who you have a duty of care for (for example, you are acting in place of a parent, also known as _loco parentis_ ) 
  * Someone who depends on you for care (known as ‘domestic dependency’) 
  * Other people as defined by law 

If a close family member has died, you do not have an entitlement to force
majeure leave. Instead, you may be able to take ‘compassionate leave’ – read
more about compassionate leave below.

###  Taking force majeure leave

You can take force majeure leave of one or more days up to a maximum of:

  * 3 days in 12 consecutive months, or 
  * A total of 5 days in 36 consecutive months (3 years) 

Depending on your employer and your contract of employment, you may be able to
take more than this.

You get paid while you are on force majeure leave. If your employer allows you
to take additional force majeure leave, you should check if it is paid.

You cannot be [ unfairly dismissed
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) for taking force majeure leave, or for
asking to take it.

Your rights to force majeure leave are set out in the [ Parental Leave Acts
1998 and 2019
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1998/act/30/revised/en/html) .

###  How to apply for force majeure leave

You must tell your employer as soon as possible that you need to take force
majeure leave.

As soon as you return to work, you must make your application **in writing**
to your employer.

Your written application should include:

  * Your name 
  * PPS number 
  * Employer’s name and address 
  * Date(s) you took force majeure leave and the reasons why 
  * Your relationship to the person who was injured or ill 

Your employer may have a specific ‘force majeure form’ that they want you to
complete.

Your contract may also require you to provide a medical certificate as proof
of the sudden illness or injury (you can request this from the doctor).

##  Leave for medical care

You can take 5 days unpaid leave in any 12 consecutive months if you need to
take time off work to deal with [ serious medical care
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-
leave-for-medical-care/) for your:

  * Child (including an adopted child) 
  * Spouse or civil partner 
  * Cohabitant 
  * Parent or grandparent 
  * Brother or sister 
  * Housemate (any other person to those listed above who lives in the same house as you) 

You don’t need any minimum service with your employer and you don’t have to
give them notice to take the leave in emergency circumstances.

##  Compassionate leave

If a close family member dies, you may be able to take compassionate leave.
This depends on:

  * Your employment contract 
  * The custom and practice in your workplace 
  * Your employer's discretion 

You should check with your employer about what you are entitled to.

##  Jury service

If you are called for [ jury service ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury-service/) ,
generally you must attend.

You should get paid as usual when called for jury service.

It should not affect any other employment rights. For example, any time you
spend on jury service does not affect your annual leave.

##  Career break or study leave

You don’t have an automatic right to take unpaid leave for a career break or
study leave. Check your contract, as some employers allow this.

If your contract does not cover career breaks or study leave, you may be able
to negotiate it with your employer.

Your employer should consider any request for a career break or study leave on
an individual, case-by-case basis.

Get more information about taking unpaid leave from the [ Workplace Relations
Commission’s Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what-we-do/employment-rights-
information/info_cust_serv/) .

##  How to make a complaint

If you and your employer disagree about leave (for example, there is a dispute
about your entitlement to force majeure leave), you can make a formal
complaint to the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC).

You must use the [ online complaint form
](https://workplacerelations.ie/en/e-complaint_form/) . All complaints must be
made **within 6 months** of the dispute happening.

The time limit may be extended for a further 6 months if you can show there
was a ‘reasonable cause’ for the delay.

Read more about [ how to make a complaint ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/adjudication-employment-rights-disputes-and-complaints/) , including
details of the WRC adjudication process.

##  More information

Get more information on the types of leave from work from the Workplace
Relations Commission's [ Information and Customer Service
](https://workplacerelations.ie/en/e-complaint_form/) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 19 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Other%20types%20of%20leave%20from%20work&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Other%20types%20of%20leave%20from%20work&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet: One-Parent Family Payment and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-one-parent-family-payment-and-income-from-work/)

This worksheet shows the effect of income from work on your One-Parent Family
Payment.

1714.6835

  * [ _Case study: force majeure leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-leave/)

Example of 2 different requests for force majeure leave, one of which was
granted. The second request was refused as there was no entitlement under the
Parental Leave Act 1998.

1547.1482

  * [ _Keeping records of working time and breaks_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/hours-of-work/employment-working-time-records/)

This page describes employers' legal duty to keep detailed records of
employees' starting and finishing times, the number of hours worked by
employees and any leave taken by employees.

1412.518

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

