**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ State examinations ](/en/education/state-examinations/) > Scheme of
Reasonable Accommodations at Certificate Examinations (RACE)

#  Scheme of Reasonable Accommodations at Certificate Examinations (RACE)

  * Exam arrangements for students with special needs 
  * What 'reasonable accommodations' can I get? 
  * 'Accommodations' that can be approved by your school 
  * Rules on 'reasonable accommodation' for exams 
  * How to apply for RACE 

##  Exam arrangements for students with special needs

If you are a secondary school student with special needs, you can get special
arrangements for sitting State examinations such as the Leaving Certificate
and Junior Certificate.

Students with disabilities (for example, visual impairments, learning
difficulties, motor and mobility impairments and so on) can apply through
their school for Reasonable Accommodations at Certificate Examinations (RACE).

Reasonable accommodations are designed to remove, as far as possible, the
impact of a disability on a student's performance and enable the student to
access the state examinations on an equal basis with other students. It does
not give the student an unfair advantage over other students in the same
examination.

The [ State Examinations Commission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/the-
state-examinations-commission/) oversees the RACE scheme.

###

##  What 'reasonable accommodations' can I get?

###

Examples of reasonable accommodations include the following.

You may:

  * Get enlarged or Braille versions of questions, if you have a visual impairment 
  * Use voice-activated computers, recording devices or scribes (other people to do the writing) 
  * Use assistive technology to access the examination paper, for example exam reading pens, magnifiers or screen readers 
  * Take your examination in a hospital or in any other stand-alone centre 
  * Get an exemption from the aural part of the examination if you are deaf or hard of hearing 

You can find more information in the [ guide on reasonable accommodation for
exams in 2024
](https://www.examinations.ie/schools/cs_view.php?q=8c6d09cce73c974505ab3298041822ac53edef00)
.

##  'Accommodations' that can be approved by your school

###

Your school has the authority to make special provisions for students with
special needs during State exams on the basis of what is best for you. Some of
the special provisions your school can make include:

  * Taking medicine, food or drinks into the examination centre where this is required for medical reasons. 
  * Use of a special desk or chair that is used in your classroom 
  * Use of low-vision aids that you normally use in the classroom 
  * Ensuring that deaf and hard-of-hearing students are seated close to the examination superintendent 
  * Granting breaks or rest periods in each examination session warranted by your physical or medical condition. (Under this special provision, the time taken for rest or as a break can be compensated for at the end of each examination period to a maximum of 20 minutes.) 

If you are not satisfied with the arrangements made, you can appeal to an
Independent Appeals Committee. The members of the forum are from outside the
Commission. All appeals are considered using the [ Framework of Principles
](http://www.examinations.ie/index.php?l=en&mc=ca&sc=rc) set out by the Expert
Advisory Group on State Examinations.

##  Rules on 'reasonable accommodation' for exams

The [ State Examinations Commission ](/en/education/state-examinations/the-
state-examinations-commission/) is responsible for ensuring the proper conduct
of State examinations in Ireland. The Commission has a [ stated policy
regarding the issue of reasonable accommodations of students
](http://www.examinations.ie/index.php?l=en&mc=ca&sc=ra) with special needs
during examination time.

However, schools also have the authority to make a number of specified
arrangements to facilitate examination candidates with special needs without
requesting advance permission from the Commission.

You can find more information and key dates in the [ guide for students on
reasonable accommodations ](https://www.examinations.ie/misc-doc/EN-
EX-94915644.pdf) .

##  How to apply for RACE

Applications for reasonable accommodations are made through your school to the
State Examinations Commission (SEC).

The application requires information about your disability or condition as
well as your educational needs and how your condition affects your school
work. You will need to sign a form to give the school permission to pass on
your information to the SEC.

External candidates who have no links to any school or centre, should [ apply
for RACE directly ](https://www.examinations.ie/?l=en&mc=ca&sc=ra) to SEC at
the time you are applying to take the exams. You can download the RACE
application form from the SEC website.

You can find further information on reasonable accommodations for State exams
on [ examinations.ie
](https://www.examinations.ie/schools/circulars/reasonable-accommodations/) .

###  State Examinations Commission

Cornamaddy  
Athlone  
Westmeath  
Ireland

**Tel:** (090) 644 2700

**Fax:** (090) 644 2744

**Homepage:** [ http://www.examinations.ie/ ](http://www.examinations.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 29 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Scheme%20of%20Reasonable%20Accommodations%20at%20Certificate%20Examinations%20%20%28RACE%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Scheme%20of%20Reasonable%20Accommodations%20at%20Certificate%20Examinations%20%20%28RACE%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _DARE admissions scheme for students with disabilities_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-admissions-scheme-for-students-with-disabilities/)

Supports access to third-level education for students with disabilities.

1583.834

  * [ _Assessment of need for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-disabilites/)

The Disability Act 2005 provides for the Assessment of Need for people with
disabilities. Find out how the assessment is carried out.

1319.1692

  * [ _Assistive technology grant for students with disabilities_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/assistive-technology-grant-students-with-disabilities/)

This document describes a scheme that provides a grant to schools to allow
them to buy equipment for students with disabilities at post-primary level.

1279.7096

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

