**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Environment and the law ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/) > European
environmental law

#  European environmental law

  * Introduction 
  * How is EU legislation implemented and enforced? 
  * EU policy on the environment 
  * How do I access environmental information? 

##  Introduction

There is a lot of EU legislation about environmental issues. Some of the main
areas include:

  * [ Nature and biodiversity ](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/protection-of-nature-and-biodiversity/)
  * Integrated pollution control 
  * [ Waste management ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/)
  * [ Air pollution ](/en/environment/pollution/air-pollution/)
  * [ Water pollution ](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/water-quality/)
  * [ Noise pollution ](/en/environment/pollution/noise-regulations/)
  * [ Environmental impact assessment ](/en/environment/climate-change/environmental-impact-assessment/)
  * Genetically modified organisms 

A lot of [ EU legislation to protect the environment ](http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/summary/chapter/environment.html?root_default=SUM_1_CODED=20) is
quite technical, and sets out detailed technical and scientific standards
which EU member states, like Ireland, must follow.

This type of legislation often states that EU member states must provide
information to the European Commission outlining:

  * How they are implementing the rules 
  * How effective the rules have been 

As well as this, there are several international conventions on environmental
protection. Generally, these are approved by the EU and then implemented
through EU legislation.  

##  How is EU legislation implemented and enforced?

The main bodies responsible for implementing environmental legislation in
Ireland are the:

  * [ Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment ](http://www.dccae.gov.ie/en-ie/Pages/home.aspx)
  * [ Local authorities ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/local-and-regional-government/functions-of-local-authorities/)
  * [ Environmental Protection Agency ](https://www.epa.ie/)

Some of the main environmental Acts include:

  * [ Environmental Protection Agency Act 1992 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1992/en/act/pub/0007/index.html)
  * [ Waste Management Act 1996 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1996/en/act/pub/0010/index.html)
  * [ Waste Management (Amendment) Act 2001 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2001/en/act/pub/0036/index.html)
  * [ Local Government (Water Pollution) Act 1977 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1977/en/act/pub/0001/index.html) and [ Local Government (Water Pollution) (Amendment) Act 1990 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1990/en/act/pub/0021/index.html)
  * [ Air Pollution Act 1987 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1987/en/act/pub/0006/index.html)
  * [ Planning and Development Act 2000 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/pub/0030/index.html)
  * [ Protection of the Environment Act 2003 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/act/pub/0027/index.html)
  * [ Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amendment) Act 2021 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2021/act/32/section/15/enacted/en/html)
  * [ Circular Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2022 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/26/enacted/en/html)

There is also a range of Statutory Instruments which implement legislation on
specific legislation and directives.

You can find more information on these from the [ Department of
Communications, Climate Action and Environment
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-the-environment-climate-
and-communications/) .

###  How do the EU enforce environmental legislation?

EU environmental legislation is enforced in the same way as other EU
legislation. The [ European Commission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/european-
government/eu-institutions/european-commission/) monitors that the legislation
is being put into practice and can bring individual member states to the [
European Court of Justice (ECJ)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/european-
government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/) if they do not apply it
properly.

[ Environmental crime ](http://ec.europa.eu/environment/legal/crime/index.htm)
s are acts that break environmental legislation and cause significant harm or
risk to the environment and human health. This includes:

  * Illegal emissions or discharges into air, water or soil 
  * Illegal trade in wildlife 
  * Illegal trade in ozone-depleting substances 
  * Illegal shipment or dumping of waste 

For more information about protecting the environment using criminal law, see
[ Directive 2008/99/EC ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32008L0099) .

##  EU policy on the environment

EU policy on the environment is reflected in its legislation and supported by
some financial programmes. The [ 8th Environment Action Programme
](http://ec.europa.eu/environment/action-programme/) of the EU, runs to 2030
and focuses on 6 areas:

  * Achieving the [ 2030 greenhouse gas emission reduction target ](https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/european-green-deal/2030-climate-target-plan_en) and [ climate neutrality by 2050 ](https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en)
  * Enhancing [ adaptive capacity, ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/adaptation-to-climate-change.html) strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change 
  * Advancing towards a regenerative growth model, separating economic growth from resource use and environmental degradation, and accelerating the transition to a [ circular economy ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/circular-economy.html)
  * Pursuing a [ zero-pollution ambition ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/zero-pollution.html) , including for air, water and soil and protecting the health and well-being of Europeans 
  * Protecting, preserving and restoring [ biodiversity ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:4459196) , and enhancing [ natural capital ](https://www.naturalcapitalireland.com/resources)
  * Reducing environmental and climate pressures related to production and consumption (particularly in the areas of energy, industry, buildings and infrastructure, mobility, tourism, international trade and the food system) 

###  European Environment Agency (EEA)

The [ European Environment Agency (EEA) ](http://www.eea.europa.eu/) are a
European agency which work with different organisations across Europe to
generate information and data around sustainability in Europe. The EEA aims to
support sustainable development and to help improve the environment by
providing this information to policy makers and the public.

###  Financial support for environmental projects

[ LIFE ](http://ec.europa.eu/environment/life/) is an EU co-financing
programme which aims to contribute to the development, implementation and
updating of EU environment policy and environmental legislation.

LIFE also aims to facilitate the integration of the environment into other
policies, and achieve sustainable development in the EU.

There are 4 sub-programmes:

  * [ Nature and Biodiversity ](https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/programmes/life/nature-and-biodiversity_en)
  * [ Circular Economy and Quality of Life ](https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/programmes/life/circular-economy-and-quality-life_en)
  * [ Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation ](https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/programmes/life/climate-change-mitigation-and-adaptation_en)
  * [ Clean Energy Transition ](https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/programmes/life/clean-energy-transition_en)

You can find [ more information about the LIFE programme
](https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/programmes/life_en) on the European Commission
website.

##  How do I access environmental information?

You have the right to get certain environmental information from a public
authority.

To get access to environmental information, you can use:

  * [ Freedom of Information (FOI) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/freedom-of-information/) legislation 
  * The [ European Communities (Access to Information on the Environment) Regulations 2007 to 2018 (AIE Regulations) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/1e52cb-access-to-information-on-the-environment-aie/#aie-legislation)

These Regulations give effect in Ireland to the [ AIE Directive ](http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:041:0026:0032:EN:PDF) .
This directive was adopted to support the Access to Information pillar of the
[ Aarhus Convention
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-and-the-
law/aarhus-convention/) .

As well as giving you the right to access environmental information, the AIE
Regulations also require public authorities to be proactive about providing
environmental information to the public.

Public authorities must inform the public of their rights and provide
information and guidance on exercising those rights. They must also make
reasonable efforts to maintain environmental information and have it in a form
that is accessible and can be reproduced.

You can read the [ guidance notes (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/76998/4d6c5e83-b377-493e-92c6-c76de9d2e0d8.pdf) on the
implementation of the AIE Regulations public authorities must have regard to.

For more information, see our page on [ Access to environmental information
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-and-the-
law/access-to-environmental-information/) .

_**Page edited:** 6 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/eu-environmental-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=European%20environmental%20law&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/eu-environmental-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/eu-environmental-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=European%20environmental%20law&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/eu-environmental-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Environmental protection of nature and biodiversity_ ](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/protection-of-nature-and-biodiversity/)

A range of Irish and EU legislation aims to ensure biodiversity by conserving
natural habitats and wild fauna and flora.

1429.4515

  * [ _Victims of crime and the law_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/victims-and-the-law/)

Legislation that has been implemented to protect and support victims of crime.

1127.3936

  * [ _Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/)

The Court of Justice of the European Union ensures that European law is
interpreted and applied in each member state. Find out about the other
important functions of this court.

1079.8702

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

