**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Health and safety ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/health-and-safety/) > Accidents in the workplace

#  Accidents in the workplace

  * Introduction 
  * Reporting and accident at work 
  * Sick leave and sick pay 
  * Social welfare payments 
  * PRSI and tax if you are out of work 
  * Claiming compensation for a work accident or injury 
  * Returning to work 
  * Being dismissed while on long-term sick leave 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Under health and safety laws, your employer has a duty to provide you with a
safe place to work.

If you have an accident while at work, you should:

  * Get medical help from your GP (family doctor) or a hospital, if needed 
  * Report the accident to your employer 
  * Check if you can get sick pay or other benefits 

###  The law on workplace accidents

Workplace accidents are covered by the [ Safety, Health and Welfare at Work
Act 2005
](http://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2005/act/10/front/revised/en/html) .
Employers can face substantial fines and penalties for breaches of the health
and safety legislation. You can read more about [ health and safety at work
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-
safety-work/) .

##  Reporting and accident at work

You should report any workplace accident to your employer. Your employer must
report certain accidents to the [ Health and Safety Authority (HSA)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/) . If you miss more than 3 consecutive days at work
because of an accident or injury, your employer must report this to the HSA.
The 3 days does not include the day of the accident.

##  Sick leave and sick pay

Since 1 January 2024, you have a right to 5 days’ [ sick pay
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-
leave-and-sick-pay/) a year (increased from 3 days in 2023). This is called
_statutory sick pay_ (that means the legal minimum). **Sick pay is paid by
your employer** at 70% of your normal pay up to a maximum of €110 a day.

##  Social welfare payments

There are a number of benefits you may be entitled to while you are out sick.

###  **Occupational Injuries Scheme**

The Occupational Injuries Scheme is a group of benefits if you are injured or
incapacitated by an accident at work or while travelling directly to or from
work.

  * [ Injury Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/) is paid if you are unfit for work due to an accident at work or while you are travelling to or from work. 
  * Under the Medical Care Scheme you can claim certain medical costs that are not paid by the Health Service Executive (HSE) or covered by the Treatment Benefit Scheme. 
  * [ Disablement Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disablement-benefit/) is paid if you lose certain physical or mental abilities because of an accident at work or while you are travelling to or from work. 

You can find out more about these and other payments under the [ Occupational
Injuries Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-
injuries-benefit-overview/) .

###  **Other social welfare payments**

You may get [ Illness Benefit
](http://www.welfare.ie/EN/Publications/SW119/Pages/1WhatisIllnessBenefit.aspx)
if you cannot work because you are sick or ill. You must be under 66, covered
by the appropriate class of [ social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/)
and satisfy the PRSI conditions.

If you do not have enough PRSI contributions, you may qualify for [ Disability
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
which is a means-tested payment. You may qualify if you have an injury,
disease or physical or mental disability that has continued or may be expected
to continue for at least one year.

If you don’t qualify for Illness Benefit or Disability Allowance, you may be
entitled to the basic Supplementary Welfare Allowance. If you have returned to
work you can claim the basic [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) for up to
30 days while you are waiting for your pay.

##  PRSI and tax if you are out of work

If you are out of work you may qualify for a [ credited contribution
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) . A credited social insurance
contribution is a contribution given to you and recorded on your social
insurance record. Credit contributions are important because you may use them
to help you qualify for a social insurance payment.

You may also get a [ tax refund ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-
when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/) if you are out of work due to illness.
This will depend on the length of time you have been unemployed, the amount of
tax you have paid, the amount of tax credits you have used and the amount of
your weekly social welfare payment.

##  Claiming compensation for a work accident or injury

###  **Personal injury claim**

You cannot claim compensation from your employer under the health and safety
legislation but you can make a personal injury claim through the [ Injuries
Resolution Board ](/en/justice/civil-law/injuries-resolution-board/) .

If either you or your employer rejects the Injuries Resolution Board
assessment, the Injuries Resolution Board may give you permission to bring a
claim through the [ civil courts ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-appealing-
a-civil-case/) .

###  Employers’ liability insurance

Your employer may have employers’ liability insurance cover. This cover allows
employers to meet the cost of compensation for employee’s injuries or illness
in the workplace.

##  Returning to work

Your employer may have a sick leave and return to work policy to support your
safe return after your illness or injury. You may need to give your employer
medical evidence that you are fit to return to work. You may need to attend
your employer’s medical expert.

If you become disabled through an accident or illness, your workplace may need
to be adapted to support your disability. You may also need special equipment
to do your job. You can read more about [ working with a disability
](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/working-with-a-disability/) .

##  Being dismissed while on long-term sick leave

If you are dismissed from your job while on long-term certified sick leave,
you may bring a claim for [ unfair dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) against your employer (if certain
conditions are met).

If your illness is a disability under your rights under [ employment equality
legislation ](http://www.ihrec.ie/publications/list/ihrec-employment-equality-
rights-explained/) are also taken into account.

##  More information

You can contact the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) [ Information and
Customer Service ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-
details/) for information about your employment rights.

The [ Health and Safety Authority ](http://hsa.ie/eng/) is responsible for
ensuring that workers (employed and self-employed) and people affected by work
activity are protected from work-related injury and ill-health. It provides
information to employers, employees and self-employed people on workplace
health and safety.

[ FLAC ](http://www.flac.ie/) (Free Legal Advice Centres) is an independent,
voluntary organisation that operates a network of legal advice clinics
throughout the country. These clinics are confidential, free of charge and
open to all. If you need legal advice, contact your nearest [ Citizens
Information Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information
on FLAC services in your area.

_**Page edited:** 5 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Accidents%20in%20the%20workplace&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Accidents%20in%20the%20workplace&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Equality in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/equality-in-the-workplace/)

Employment equality legisation makes discrimination illegal in certain
employment-related areas.

1522.8475

  * [ _Smoking in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-workplace/)

It is an offence to smoke in an enclosed place of work. Find out more about
the smoking ban and how it is enforced.

1418.7495

  * [ _Data protection in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/data-protection-in-the-workplace/)

Overview of some of the main obligations for employers and outlines the rights
of employees under Data Protection law.

1315.6615

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

