**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to primary school ](/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/) > Starting school

#  Starting school

  * Introduction 
  * Enrolling your child at primary school 
  * Resolving problems at school 
  * Absence or changing school 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Most children in Ireland start their first-level education in primary school
(also called _national school)_ at the age of 4 or 5 years of age. Legally,
children can be enrolled at primary school from the age of 4 upwards and must
start their formal education by the age of 6 years.

The primary school cycle is 8 years long. Schools generally have 2 years of
infant classes - junior and senior infants - followed by class 1 to class 6.

There are different types of primary schools in Ireland. All schools have a [
patron ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-
school/ownership-of-primary-schools/) who sets the ethos of the school. The
patron may be a religious order. There are denominational schools, multi-
denominational schools, Irish-speaking schools (called _Gaelscoileanna_ ),
special schools and non-State-aided private primary schools.

Education in State primary schools is free of charge. The current and capital
costs of primary schools, including teachers' salaries, are funded mainly by
the Government and supplemented by local contributions.

##  Enrolling your child at primary school

You can send your child to the primary school of your choice, provided there
is a place available for them. Where there is a shortage of places the school
must give priority based on their admissions or enrolment policy. This is
drawn up by the [ board of management ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/) and should be
available to you on request. You can find out more about [ different types of
primary schools ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-
primary-school/choosing-a-primary-school/) and their [ admissions policies
](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-
secondary-schools/) .

**Finding a place**

To enrol your child in primary school, [ check the list of primary schools in
your area ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/find-a-school/) . You should contact
the school of your choice to see if there is a place available. The school of
your choice may place your child on a waiting list or you may need to contact
other schools to find a place.

[ Children with special educational needs ](/en/education/special-education-
needs/special-needs-education-primary-schools/) are generally educated in
mainstream schools. Though there are some special schools.

###  Your child in school

**Schools hours and days**

The length of the school day in primary school is 5 hours and 40 minutes. This
includes assembly time, roll-call and breaks which are usually around 11am and
12.30pm. Primary schools may reduce the school day by an hour for children in
their first 2 years at primary school (commonly called _junior infants_ and
_senior infants_ ) and in their third year at primary school (commonly called
_first class_ ). You can read the [ Department of Education Circular 11/95
Time in School (Primary) (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/15685/6e55f1a07b994e57870eb6dd83edf415.pdf) .

Overall, primary schools must be open for a minimum of 183 days in each school
year. All schools must close for the months of July and August. [ Christmas,
Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-
primary-and-postprimary/) in both primary and post-primary schools.

**Teachers and staff**

The principal is responsible for running the school. Each class has a class
teacher who teaches all subjects to their class. In some smaller schools the
teacher has more than one class. There may be other teachers in the school
such as a [ language support teacher ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/educational-supports/resources-for-non-english-speakers/) to help
learn English or a learning support teacher to help children who are having
difficulty with the curriculum. Schools set their own policy in relation to
homework.

**Starting class**

Children starting school for the first time will be in junior infants class.
If your child has attended school before, the principal, you and the class
teacher will decide together which class your child will be in. Primary school
children are [ only allowed to repeat a year for educational reasons and in
special situations
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/15376/27b5fe97641e4ea7b137bfd125bb5e4b.pdf#page=null)
. You can get more information in the Department's circular [ retention of
primary pupils in the same grade ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/15376/27b5fe97641e4ea7b137bfd125bb5e4b.pdf) .

The [ school must provide reports for each child
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1998/act/51/enacted/en/html) and the
school must allow parents to have access to their child's school record.
Schools usually hold a parent/teacher meeting during the year. If you are
concerned about your child's progress at any stage during the year, you can
speak to the class teacher.

**Uniforms and school bags**

While students do not have to wear a uniform at primary school, many schools
(in consultation with parents) have introduced school uniforms. Check with
your school about their policy. The Department has published [ recommendations
on school uniforms
](https://circulars.gov.ie/pdf/circular/education/2017/32.pdf) and on the [
the weight of schoolbags. ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/38263/57a592bfdedc4b97a12404a7f0b853fb.pdf)

##  Resolving problems at school

If your child has a problem that you cannot sort out, you can arrange to speak
to the class teacher. If this doesn't resolve the problem you can speak to the
school principal.

If you have a complaint about a teacher or about the school, the first step is
usually to speak to the class teacher. Then, if the complaint is not resolved,
you can speak to the school principal. The next step is to approach the
chairperson of the school's board of management.

If you have exhausted the school's complaints procedure and are still not
satisfied, you can appeal to the Ombudsman for Children.

If your [ complaint is about a teacher’s fitness to teach
](http://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/Professional-Standards/Complaints-about-
Registered-Teachers/) , you should first use the school’s complaints
procedure. If you have exhausted this procedure and are not satisfied with the
outcome, you can [ make a complaint to the Teaching Council
](http://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/Professional-Standards/Complaints-about-
Registered-Teachers/Making-a-Complaint/) .

The Department of Education has no legal powers to investigate individual
complaints about schools or to instruct schools to follow a particular course
of direction with regard to individual complaints. The Department provides
information on the [ complaints procedure in primary school
](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/complaints-about-schools/#parental-
complaints) .

##  Absence or changing school

If your child cannot attend school you must tell the school the reason for the
absence. Write a short note to the school to explain why your child was out
and send it in with your child when they go back to school.

If you are changing school you should tell the school that your child is
leaving and will not be returning. You can ask the principal to give you a
report on your child's progress which can be given to the new school when you
are enrolling your child.

##  Further information

You can find documents on our website about [ preschool education
](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/early-childhood-education/)
,  teaching your child at home  , [ admissions policies in schools
](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-
secondary-schools/) , the [ curriculum in primary schools
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-
school/primary-school-curriculum/) , the [ ownership of primary schools
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-
school/ownership-of-primary-schools/) , [ school discipline
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-
in-schools/school-discipline/) , [ bullying ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/bullying-in-schools-in-
ireland/) , [ school attendance ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-attendance/) , [ help
with costs of books and uniform ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/educational-supports/financial-help-with-school/) and [ school
health screenings ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/school-
health-services/) . You can also find out more about programmes that address
educational disadvantage such as  tackle educational disadvantage in primary
schools  including the [ Early Start Pre-school Programme ](/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/early-start/) and [ special educational
arrangements for Travellers. ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/educational-supports/educational-arrangements-for-travellers/)

_**Page edited:** 4 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Starting%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Starting%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Starting post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-school/)

Describes post-primary education, including how to choose a post-primary
school and enrol your child.

1959.6199

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1210.0736

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

1196.3977

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

