**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ State examinations ](/en/education/state-examinations/) > Leaving
Certificate examination fees

#  Leaving Certificate examination fees

  * Introduction 
  * How to pay exam fees 
  * Exam fees 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Students who are taking or repeating the Leaving Certificate pay examination
fees to sit the exams. If you or your parent(s) or guardian(s) hold a medical
card, you are exempt from fees.

There will be [ no fee for the Leaving Certificate exam in 2024
](https://www.gov.ie/en/speech/65152-statement-by-minster-donohoe-on-
budget-2024/) .

##  How to pay exam fees

If you are taking the Leaving Certificate in a school setting, your school
will give you a form. You make the payment through a bank and the bank must
stamp the form. You then return the form to the school.

If you, your parent(s) or guardian(s) hold a current [ medical card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) you do not have
to pay the fee. Put the details of the medical card on the fee payment form
and return the form to the school.

**External students**

If you are an external student (that is, you are sitting your examinations
outside of a school setting), you can either [ apply and pay online
](https://www.examinations.ie/index.php?l=en&mc=ca&sc=ca) or get a form from
the Entries section of the State Examinations Commission (see 'Where to
apply') and pay through a bank.

##  Exam fees

There will be [ no fee for the Leaving Certificate exam in 2024
](https://www.gov.ie/en/speech/65152-statement-by-minster-donohoe-on-
budget-2024/) .

##  Where to apply

###  State Examinations Commission

Cornamaddy  
Athlone  
Westmeath  
Ireland

**Tel:** (090) 644 2700

**Fax:** (090) 644 2744

**Homepage:** [ http://www.examinations.ie/ ](http://www.examinations.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 11 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Leaving%20Certificate%20examination%20fees&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Leaving%20Certificate%20examination%20fees&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The State Examinations Commission_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/the-state-examinations-commission/)

Describes the work of the State Examinations Commission.

1637.0117

  * [ _Scheme of Reasonable Accommodations at Certificate Examinations (RACE)_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-disabilities/)

Special arrangements are in place for children with disabilities who are
taking State examinations

1416.7915

  * [ _Third-level student fees and charges_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/)

Information on the Free Fees Iniative. Explains who doesn't have to pay third-
level fees.

1245.1057

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

