**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/) > [ Fees and
supports for third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/) > Grants and funds for mature
students

#  Grants and funds for mature students

  * Who is a mature student? 
  * Free Fees Initiative and Student Grant Scheme 
  * Back to Education Allowance 
  * Other support funds for mature students 
  * Studying abroad as a mature student 
  * More information 

##  Who is a mature student?

If you wish to enter or return to third-level education and you are over 23
years of age, you can be considered a mature student. Irish third-level
colleges have set aside a number of [ places for mature students
](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-
for-mature-students/) .

You will have to consider the costs of fees and maintaining yourself while
studying. The cost will depend on whether you are going to do a full-time or
part-time course.

##  Free Fees Initiative and Student Grant Scheme

Depending on your circumstances, you may be eligible for:

  * The [ Free Fees Initiative ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/)
  * The [ Student Grant Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/)

###  **Free fees initiative**

To qualify for free fees, you must meet criteria based on:

  * Residence 
  * Nationality and immigration status 
  * Course requirements 

Read more about the [ eligibility criteria for free third-level fees
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/#0434eb) .

Your eligibility for free fees is assessed using the information you give when
applying for a college place.

###  **Student Grant Scheme**

If you are **a full-time student** studying an approved course, you can apply
to [ Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) ](https://www.susi.ie/how-to-
apply/index.html) for a student grant. All types of students including mature
students can apply for funding.

To be eligible for a student grant, you must meet certain criteria including:

  * Nationality and residency 
  * Approved course of study and progression 
  * Income 

Your reckonable income, calculated for grant purposes, must fall under
specific thresholds.

Read more on the [ eligibility criteria for a student grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) .

If you are applying for an undergraduate course and you have already completed
an undergraduate course, you are **not** eligible for either a student grant
or free fees. However, in certain circumstances, [ you may be considered
eligible for funding ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/previous-
education-and-progression/) , for example, if you attended a course previously
but did not complete it.

If you are studying certain **part-time undergraduate courses** , you can
apply to SUSI for the [ part-time fee scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-
courses/) .

You may be eligible for a grant if you are starting a [ Post-Leaving
Certificate (PLC) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) course as part of
the [ tertiary education programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/tertiary-education-programme/) leading to a
higher-level qualification than your previous undergraduate qualification.

[ Funding is available for postgraduate students
](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/postgraduate-income-
thresholds-and-grant-award-rates/) under the Student Grant Scheme for
**approved postgraduate courses** in Ireland and Northern Ireland. You cannot
get support under the Scheme for courses elsewhere in the EU. Read more about
[ postgraduate student grants
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-student-grant/) .

[ Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) ](https://www.susi.ie/) handles all
applications for student grants. You must [ apply for your grant online
](https://grantsonline.ie/auth/esr.elogin) . Applications for the 2024-2025
academic year are open.

###  Tax relief on fees

If you have to pay fees, you may be able to get [ tax relief on the fees you
pay ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-
level-fees/) at the standard rate of income tax.

##  Back to Education Allowance

If you are getting an unemployment, One-Parent Family or disability payment,
the [ Back to Education Allowance (BTEA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-allowance/) allows you to study at second and third level without
losing your benefits. You must meet certain criteria to be eligible for the
BTEA. If you are studying part-time, you may be able to keep your benefits
under the [ Back to Education Programme.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-programme/)

You can apply for the [ Back to Education Allowance (BTEA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-allowance/) , or other strands of the [ Back to Education
Programme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-
education/back-to-education-programme/) , by filling in the [ Back to
Education Allowance application form (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/34307/dc7a224c23e9494caaa434e133e74d0b.pdf) . This
form is also available from your local [ Intreo Centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/40cf48-find-your-local-intreo-office/?fl=en) .

Send the form to the office that deals with applications from people on your
particular payment. These offices are listed on the back of the form.

If you are getting the Back to Education Allowance or you are on a [ Post-
Leaving Certificate course
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) and getting a [ VTOS allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) , you are not eligible for
the maintenance component of the student grant. However, you may get an
exemption from college fees or the student contribution, so you should
complete a student grant application.

Read more about [ social welfare payments and the student grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-
education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/) .

##  Other support funds for mature students

There are other funds available to support you in third-level education.
Generally, each college has a mature studentsâ€™ officer who can provide
information about financial supports available for mature students.

###  **Fund for Students with Disabilities**

If you have a disability, you may be entitled to financial support. The [ Fund
for Students with Disabilities (FSD) ](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-
performance/funding/student-finance/fund-for-students-with-disabilities/)
supports students in approved courses in Ireland, other EU countries, and the
UK. The FSD provides funding for a range of supports, including assistive
technology equipment and software.

To apply for the Fund for Students with Disabilities (FSD), contact the
disability or access office at the college of your choice when you are
registering.

Read more about the FSD on the [ Higher Education Authority
](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-performance/funding/student-finance/fund-
for-students-with-disabilities/) website.

###  **Student Assistance Fund**

The [ Student Assistance Fund ](http://hea.ie/funding-governance-
performance/funding/student-finance/student-assistance-fund/) is for full-time
or part-time students who are experiencing financial difficulties and may be
unable to continue their studies. Students can apply for the Student
Assistance Fund to help with either temporary or ongoing financial
difficulties.

It can help with costs like books, rent, food, childcare, essential travel,
and utility and medical bills. It does not cover tuition or college
registration fees or student loan repayments.

You can apply for funding through the access or student services office in
your college. It is important to apply as soon as you can. Some colleges have
a closing date for applications and you should check when this is.

The Student Assistance Fund is administered on a strictly confidential basis
by your college.

###  **The 1916 Bursary Fund**

The [ 1916 Bursary Fund ](https://1916bursary.ie/) provides funding for first-
time entrants of an undergraduate programme from disadvantaged backgrounds who
are significantly under-represented in higher education. To be eligible, you
must have household reckonable income that meets the criteria for the [ SUSI
Special Rate of Maintenance Grant ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-
criteria/income/special-rate-of-grant/) .

If you have not applied to SUSI or if your application to SUSI was refused,
you must provide evidence of your household income that includes a long-term
means-tested social welfare payment.

First-time mature students are eligible to apply. Applicants must apply online
through the [ 1916 Bursary Application Portal ](https://1916bursary.ie/how-to-
apply/) . Applications for 2024-2025 are expected to open in September 2024.

See a full [ list of colleges and universities that participate in the 1916
Bursary ](https://1916bursary.ie/participating-colleges) .

###  **Bursary Scheme for young people with care experience**

Tusla can provide financial support to a maximum of â‚¬2,000 to young people who
have had care experience to help with fees to access further education or
training. To be eligible, you must be over 18 and have had care experience in
Ireland of at least 6 months before your 18th birthday.

Read more about the [ Bursary Scheme, the eligibility criteria and how to
apply ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/after-care/bursary-
scheme/) .

The opening date for applications is 9 September 2024 and closing date is
Friday, 11 October 2024 at 5pm.

##  Studying abroad as a mature student

If you plan to [ study abroad,
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/studying-abroad/) you may be eligible for a [ student grant from
SUSI ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) .
A range of approved undergraduate courses in the EU and UK are covered. Read
more about [ European education programmes
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-education-
programmes/) .

Under the [ Student Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) , there are no
age limits for the student grants for studying in another EU state but it must
be your first undergraduate course.

You can find information about living and studying abroad on:

  * The EUâ€™s [ Your Europe ](https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/residence/residence-rights/index_en.htm) website 
  * The [ Euroguidance Ireland ](https://euroguidance.ie/home) website 

If you are interested in [ studying in the UK
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/studying-abroad/studying-in-the-uk-including-northern-ireland/) ,
contact the [ British Council ](https://www.britishcouncil.org/) to get
information on the courses available and the application process for each
course.

If you are interested in studying outside of the EU, you should get in touch
with the [ Irish embassy or consulate
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) in that country for further
information.

##  More information

You can find more information about grants and funds for students in higher
education [ on the Higher Education Authority website
](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-performance/funding/student-finance/) .

###  Higher Education Authority

3 Shelbourne Buildings  
Crampton Avenue  
Shelbourne Road  
Ballsbridge  
Dublin 4  
D04 C2Y6

**Tel:** (01) 231 7100

**Homepage:** [ http://www.hea.ie ](http://www.hea.ie)

**Email:** [ info@hea.ie ](mailto:info@hea.ie)

###  Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI)

P.O. Box 869  
Little Island  
Cork

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 9.00am â€“ 5.30pm (excluding public
holidays)

**Tel:** 0818 888 777 (Ireland), or (+353)1 524 2257 (calling from abroad)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.susi.ie/ ](https://www.susi.ie/)

**Email:** [ support@susi.ie ](mailto:support@susi.ie)

_**Page edited:** 30 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Grants%20and%20funds%20for%20mature%20students&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Grants%20and%20funds%20for%20mature%20students&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Third-level courses and mature students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-students/)

This page describes the different full-time and part-time educational options
available to adults at third level.

2370.5051

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

1286.1748

  * [ _School transport for post-primary students_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-transport-scheme/)

The Department of Education provides subsidised school transport for eligible
post-primary students.

1158.6735

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

