**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Health and safety ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/health-and-safety/) > Returning to work safely

#  Returning to work safely

  * Introduction 
  * Return to the workplace 
  * Planning for return to work 
  * Getting to and from work 
  * Staying safe at work 
  * Where can I make a complaint? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

**Workers can return to the workplace.**

###  Guidance for employers on the return to work

This page summarises the work safely protocol published by the HSA, the HSE,
the Department of Health and the Department of Enterprise, Trade and
Employment.

The latest work safely protocol (the Transitional Protocol) was issued on 31
January 2022. It reflects the Government announcement on the easing of public
health measures and places a greater emphasis on supporting the safe return to
physical attendance in the workplace.

The Transitional Protocol:

  * Describes the steps that employers and employees should take before a workplace reopens to make sure they can return to work safely 
  * Sets out infection prevention and control measures to allow a safe return and a continued safe operation of the workplace 

You can get more detailed information in the [ Transitional Protocol (pdf)
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/Publications/Publication-files/Transitional-
Protocol-Good-Practice-Guidance-for-Continuing-to-Prevent-the-Spread-of-
COVID-19.pdf) .

The [ Health Safety Authority (HSA) website
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/topics/covid-19_coronavirus_information_and_resources/covid-19_business_supports/business_supports/work_safely_templates_checklists_and_posters/)
has checklists and templates on ventilation, rapid antigen testing and
returning to the office.

##  Return to the workplace

**Workers can return to the workplace.**

As a phased return to the workplace begins, some workers may be particularly
concerned about returning to the physical workplace. Employers should consult
and address concerns.

##  Planning for return to work

All employers must prepare and put systems and controls in place before they
reopen their business and workplaces.

###  At risk workers

For some workers, the risks from COVID-19 infection are higher. There are two
levels of higher risk – very high risk (extremely vulnerable) and high risk.
There is different public health advice for each of these groups. Employers
should take account of the particular need of workers in the high or very high
risk category.

A fitness for work medical risk assessment may need to be completed before at
risk workers return to the physical workplace.

###  Working from home

The Government has called on employers to start to develop or finalise their
long-term arrangements for [ blended or remote working
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/working-
at-home/) . The remote or working from home policy should be developed in
consultation with workers and Trade Unions.

###  Vaccinations

The decision to get a vaccination against COVID-19 **is voluntary** .
Therefore you can make your own decision about whether or not to get a
vaccination.

**Telling your employer your vaccination status**

In most cases, you do not have to tell your employer whether or not you are
vaccinated. The Work Safely Protocol does not currently require employers to
collect any information regarding vaccination status. The Data Protection
Commission confirms this in its [ guidance on processing vaccination data
(pdf)
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/sites/default/files/uploads/2021-11/Processing%20COVID-19%20Vaccination%20Data%20in%20the%20context%20of%20Employment%20and%20the%20Work%20Safely%20Protocol.pdf)
.

##  Getting to and from work

You should continue to follow public health advice when travelling to and from
work.

If you are using public transport, it is recommended that you [ wear a face
mask or covering ](/en/health/covid19/face-coverings-during-covid19/) .

If you are sharing a car with a co-worker, a face mask or covering is also
recommended.

##  Staying safe at work

Employers and employees should work together to help reduce the spread of
COVID-19 and know the symptoms of COVID-19. The complete [ list of COVID-19
symptoms ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/coronavirus/symptoms.html) is
available on the HSE Website.

###  Employer’s responsibilities

Your employer should:

  * Advise workers not to come to work if they have symptoms of COVID-19 
  * Have appropriate hygiene facilities readily available, display posters of [ good hand washing practices ](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/how-to-wash-your-hands.html)
  * Give tissues as well as bins or bags for employee’s disposal 
  * Empty bins regularly and provide advice on good respiratory practice, including the safe use, storage and disposal of face masks or coverings 
  * Provide hand sanitisers, an alcohol based sanitiser must have a minimum of 60% alcohol 
  * Give workers instructions to follow if they develop symptoms during work 
  * Display information on sign and symptoms of COVID-19 
  * Cooperate with the local Public Health Offices if a case or outbreak of COVID-19 is confirmed in the workplace and implement any follow up actions required 

###  If an employee has symptoms of COVID-19

If an employee has symptoms of COVID-19 during work hours, your employer must
have a designated isolation area for employees and should follow a specific
procedure:

  * The case manager or designated contact person must direct the person to a designated isolation area, along a designated route (make provisions for one or more persons displaying symptoms such as an additional isolation area or have contingency plans in place) 
  * Provide a well-fitted [ medical grade or respirator face mask ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/preventing-the-spread/when-to-wear-face-covering/) for the person presenting with symptoms. The worker should wear the mask if in a common area with other people or while exiting the premises 
  * Arrange for the employee to stay in isolation before arranging for them to be transported home, or to a medical facility, public transport should not be used. 
  * Arrange for appropriate cleaning of the isolation area and work areas 
  * Carry out a full risk assessment of the incident to see what, if any, further action needs to be taken 

###  Employee’s responsibilities

As an employee, you should:

  * Keep up to date on the signs and symptoms of COVID-19 
  * Not go to work if you have any signs or symptoms of COVID-19 
  * Follow the public health advice and guidance on self-isolation, restricting movement, testing and close contacts 
  * Report to management immediately if you develop symptoms during work 
  * Cooperate with any Public Health personnel and your employer in the event of a case or outbreak in your workplace 

##  Where can I make a complaint?

If you feel your employer is not meeting the guidance in the Transitional
Protocol you can raise your concerns with the HSA.

You can make a complaint using the HSA’s [ online complaint form
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/publications_and_forms/online_complaint_form/online_complaint_form.html)
. You should raise your concern with your employer first to give them a chance
to fix the issue.

##  Further information

You can read the full [ Transitional Protocol: Good Practice Guidance for
Continuing to Prevent the Spread of COVID-19
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/Publications/Transitional-Protocol-
COVID-19.html) .

Employers can get information from the [ HSA website
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/topics/covid-19_coronavirus_information_and_resources/covid-19_business_supports/business_supports/work_safely_online_courses/)
.

The National Standards Authority of Ireland (NSAI) has [ COVID-19 Business
Continuity Guides and technical resources ](https://www.nsai.ie/covid-19/) .

###  Health and Safety Authority

The Metropolitan Building  
James Joyce Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 K0Y8

**Opening Hours:** Lines are open on Monday to Fridays 9am - 3pm

**Tel:** (01) 614 7000

**Locall:** 0818 289 389

**Fax:** (01) 614 7020

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hsa.ie ](https://www.hsa.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/)

**Email:** [ wcu@hsa.ie ](mailto:wcu@hsa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 7 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/returning-to-work-
safely/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Returning%20to%20work%20safely&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/returning-to-work-
safely/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/returning-to-work-
safely/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Returning%20to%20work%20safely&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/returning-to-work-
safely/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and working in construction_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/returning-to-ireland-and-working-in-construction/)

Provides information on careers in construction, Safepass, certifications, and
recognition of foreign qualifications, as well as details about trade unions,
wages, and pensions for those returning to Ireland and seeking to begin or
continue work in the construction industry.

2108.7979

  * [ _Returning to work_ ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/return-to-work/)

If you are returning to work you need to find out what options and supports
are available and the steps you should take in relation to tax and PRSI.

1911.328

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and having a baby_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-baby/)

Outlines what public maternity care services you can access when you return to
Ireland and your entitlements to take leave from work when you have a baby.

1527.445

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

