**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Public holidays

#  Public holidays

  * Introduction 
  * Dates of public holidays 
  * Public holidays and your entitlements 
  * If you are on ‘sick leave’ on a public holiday 
  * If you are on maternity, adoptive, paternity, parent’s, parental leave or domestic violence leave 
  * If you are on lay-off, short-time work, or lose your job 
  * I am not getting my public holiday entitlements 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

There are 10 public holidays in Ireland each year (increased from 9 in 2022).

Public holidays may commemorate a special day or other event, for example,
Saint Patrick's Day (17 March) or Christmas Day (25 December).

**Since 2023** , there has been a new annual public holiday in early February
to mark St Brigid’s Day. The public holiday is the first Monday in February,
except where St Brigid’s Day (1 February) happens to fall on a Friday, in
which case Friday 1 February will be a public holiday.

On a public holiday, sometimes called a _bank holiday_ , most businesses and
schools close. Other services (for example, public transport) still operate
but often have restricted schedules.

##  Dates of public holidays

Public holidays are:

  * New Year's Day (1 January) 
  * First Monday in February, or 1 February if the date falls on a Friday 
  * Saint Patrick's Day (17 March) 
  * Easter Monday 
  * First Monday in May 
  * First Monday in June 
  * First Monday in August 
  * Last Monday in October 
  * Christmas Day (25 December) 
  * Saint Stephen's Day (26 December) 

###  **Public Holiday dates in Ireland**

**2024** |  **2025**  
---|---  
1 January  |  1 January   
5 February  |  3 February   
17 March  |  17 March   
1 April  |  21 April   
6 May  |  5 May   
3 June  |  2 June   
5 August  |  4 August   
28 October  |  27 October   
25 December  |  25 December   
26 December  |  26 December   
  
Good Friday **is not a public holiday** . While some schools and businesses
close on that day, you have no automatic entitlement to time off work on that
day.

###  How is the date of Easter Monday set each year?

Easter Monday is the only public holiday that can vary significantly from year
to year. The date of Easter moves every year.

Easter should be the first Sunday after the first full moon occurring on or
after 21 March. This means the earliest possible date for Easter Sunday in any
year is 22 March, and the latest is 25 April.

**Easter Monday falls on 1 April 2024 and 21 April 2025.**

##  Public holidays and your entitlements

Most employees are entitled to paid leave on public holidays. Full-time
workers have immediate entitlement to benefit for public holidays and part-
time workers have entitlement to benefit when they have worked a total of 40
hours in the previous 5 weeks. Read about ‘Part-time employees’ below.

If you qualify for public holiday benefit, you are entitled to one of the
following:

  * A paid day off on the public holiday 
  * An additional day of annual leave 
  * An additional day's pay 
  * A paid day off within a month of the public holiday 

You can ask your employer at least 21 days before a public holiday, which of
the alternatives will apply. If your employer does not respond at least 14
days before the public holiday, you are entitled to take the actual public
holiday as a paid day off.

Your public holiday entitlements are set out in the [ Organisation of Working
Time Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0020/index.html) . You can
also read about the appropriate rate of daily pay in the [ Organisation of
Working Time (Determination of Pay For Holidays) Regulations (SI 475/1997)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/si/0475.html) .

###  Part-time employees

If you work for your employer for at least 40 hours in the 5 weeks before the
public holiday and it falls on a **day you normally work** , you get paid for
the day even if you don’t work. If you have to work that day, you are entitled
to an extra day's pay.

If you **don’t normally work** on a certain day but it’s a public holiday, you
should get paid one-fifth of your weekly pay. Even if you never work on public
holidays, you still get paid a fifth of your weekly pay as compensation for
the public holiday. Again, you must have worked for your employer for at least
40 hours in the 5 weeks before the public holiday.

You can count time spent on annual leave as ‘time worked’ when calculating the
40 hours worked in the 5 weeks before the public holiday.

###  When public holidays fall on a weekend

If the public holiday falls on a day which is not a normal working day for
that business (for example, on Saturday or Sunday), you are still entitled to
benefit for that public holiday. However, you do not have any automatic legal
entitlement to have the next working day off work.

Read more about [ public holidays and your employment rights
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/public-holidays/)
on the Workplace Relations Commission website.

##  If you are on ‘sick leave’ on a public holiday

###  **You are a full-time worker**

If you are on [ sick leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/) during a public
holiday, you are entitled to benefit for the public holiday you missed. Your
employer can also choose to regard you as not on sick leave on the public
holiday and pay you as normal for the public holiday. If this is the case, the
public holiday is not counted as a sick leave day.

###  **You are a part-time worker**

If you are on sick leave during a public holiday, you are entitled to benefit
for the public holiday once you worked for your employer for at least 40 hours
in the previous five-week period - see 'Part-time employees' above.

###  Exceptions

You are not entitled to pay or time off for the public holiday if you are on
sick leave immediately before the public holiday, and either of the following
apply:

  * You have been off work for more than 26 weeks due to an ordinary illness or an accident 
  * You have been off work for more than 52 weeks due to an occupational accident 

##  If you are on maternity, adoptive, paternity, parent’s, parental leave or
domestic violence leave

You are entitled to leave for any public holidays that occur while you are on
[ maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/maternity-leave/) , [ parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/) , [ paternity leave,
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/paternity-leave/) [ adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/) , [ parent's leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-
leave/) or [ domestic violence leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/domestic-violence-leave/) .

However, you are not entitled to public holiday benefits if you were absent
from work immediately before the public holiday and your absence is:

  * Over 13 weeks, due to lay off or some other reason and authorised by your employer 
  * Due to a strike 
  * After the first 13 weeks of [ carer's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/)

These rights are set down in the [ Maternity Protection Acts 1994 and 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0034/index.html) , the [
Parental Leave Acts 1998 - 2023,
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0030/index.html) the [
Paternity Leave and Benefit Act 2016
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2016/act/11/enacted/en/html) , the [
Adoptive Leave Acts 1995 and 2005
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0002/index.html) , and the [
Parent's Leave and Benefit Act 2019
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/act/35/enacted/en/pdf) respectively.

##  If you are on lay-off, short-time work, or lose your job

During lay off or short-time working, you still are employed by your employer
and your contract of employment remains in force. This means that you are
entitled to benefit for any public holidays that occur during the first 13
weeks of lay off.

Part-time employees must have worked at least 40 hours in the 5 weeks before
the public holiday.

###  If you lose your job

If your employment finishes during the week, ending on the day before a public
holiday, and you have worked for your employer for the previous 4 weeks, you
should get an additional day's pay for the public holiday. This also applies
to part-time employees who have worked at least 40 hours in the previous 5
weeks.

**For example:**

In the case of [ Gazboro Ltd. -v- BATU (DWT9916)
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Cases/1999/July/DWT9916.html) , the
claimants finished their employment on 18 December 1998. They claimed an
entitlement to be paid for the public holiday’s on 25 and 26 December.

As the Court interpreted the wording of [ Section 23(2)(a)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0020/sec0023.html#sec23) of
the Organisation of Working Time Act 1997, the week ending at midnight on 24
December began at midnight on 18 December. Since the claimants worked for the
employer during the 4 weeks before that week, they were entitled to an
additional day's pay for 25 December.

The week ending on 25 December began at midnight on 19 December. Since the
claimants ceased to be employed on 18 December, they had no entitlement to be
paid for 26 December.

##  I am not getting my public holiday entitlements

If you are not getting your public holiday entitlement, you should discuss
this with your employer.

You can also complain to the WRC under the Organisation of Working Time Act.
You must make your complaint using the WRC’s [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
**within 6 months** of the dispute or complaint occurring.

This time limit may be extended for a further 6 months if there was reasonable
cause for the delay.

Read more about [ how to make a complaint ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/adjudication-employment-rights-disputes-and-complaints/) , including
details of the WRC adjudication process.  

##  More information

You can find out more about public holidays on the [ Workplace Relations
Commission (WRC) website
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/public-holidays/)
.

You can also contact the WRC’s [ Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) :

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 1 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-
holidays/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Public%20holidays&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-
holidays/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-
holidays/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Public%20holidays&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-
holidays/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Public order offences_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/public-order-offenses-in-ireland/)

The law on public order offences is mainly set down in the Criminal Justice
(Public Order) Act 1994. It deals with how people behave in public places and
also provides for crowd control at public events. Find out more about the
different types of offences.

1081.8829

  * [ _Case study: Public holiday entitlement_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-public-holiday-entitlement/)

Part-time workers are entitled to public holidays even if they are not due to
work on the day of the public holiday. This case study shows how a part-time
worker's payment for a public holiday is calculated.

994.5251

  * [ _Maternity care and the public health nurse_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-nurse/)

A description of the postnatal care provided by your public health nurse.

946.0738

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

