**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) >
Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme

#  Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme

  * Introduction 
  * EWSS changes 
  * Rules for EWSS 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Under the [ July Jobs Stimulus Package
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/5654a-july-jobs-stimulus/) the Employment
Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) replaced the [ Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme (TWSS)
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/covid19-temporary-wage-subsidy-
scheme/) from 1 September 2020.

The EWSS ended for most businesses on 30 April 2022. For businesses directly
impacted by the public health restrictions introduced in December 2021, the
EWSS ended on 31 May 2022.

**This page can be used for reference purposes for information on the
operation of the EWSS up until it closed on 31 May 2022.**

Under the EWSS scheme, employers and new firms in sectors impacted by COVID-19
whose turnover has fallen 30% got a flat-rate subsidy per week based on the
number of qualifying employees on the payroll, including seasonal staff and
new employees.

##  EWSS changes

The EWSS remained in place in a graduated form until 30 April 2022 for most
businesses. For businesses directly impacted by the public health restrictions
introduced in December 2021, the EWSS ended on 31 May 2022.

####  **Businesses not directly impacted by the public health restrictions**

The changes were:

  * The enhanced rates of supports under the current 5 payment bands [ continued for December 2021 and January 2022 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/1a168-ministers-donohoe-and-mcgrath-announces-update-on-business-supports/) . 
  * A two-rate structure of €151.50 and €203 applied for February. 
  * A flat rate subsidy of €100 applied for March and April. 
  * The full rate of Employers’ PRSI was reinstated from 1 March 2022. 
  * The EWSS ended on 30 April 2022. 

####  Businesses directly impacted by the public health restrictions

The changes were:

  * The graduated step-down in subsidy rates was [ delayed by one month ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/bf5d1-government-announces-significant-expansion-of-supports-for-businesses-affected-by-the-latest-public-health-restrictions/) . 
  * Businesses continued to receive the enhanced rates of subsidy for February. 
  * A two-rate structure of €151.50 and €203 applied for March. 
  * A flat rate subsidy of €100 applied for April and May. 
  * The full rate of Employers’ PRSI was reinstated from 1 March 2022. 
  * The EWSS ended on 31 May 2022. 

##  Rules for EWSS

**The EWSS closed on 31 May 2022. The information below can be used for
reference purposes.**

###  How do I qualify?

To qualify for the scheme you must:

  * Have valid tax clearance 
  * Meet the reduction in turnover or customer orders test 

####  Tax clearance

In order to receive the EWSS payments, you must:

  * Have a valid tax clearance certificate 
  * Continue to maintain tax clearance for the duration of the scheme 

You can check your current tax clearance status online through ROS. More
information on tax clearance is available from [ Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-business/tax-clearance/index.aspx) .

The July Stimulus Package included measures on _‘warehousing’_ or deferral of
unpaid VAT and Employers PAYE debt associated with COVID-19. The [ Economic
Recovery Plan for Ireland ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/709d1-economic-
recovery-plan/) announced that EWSS overpayments will now be included in the
scheme.

You can get more information on the initiatives covering COVID-19 related tax
debts in [ Revenue’s Information Booklet (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/debt-
warehousing-reduced-interest-measures.pdf) .

####  Reduction in turnover or customer orders test

You must self-declare to Revenue that you have experienced significant
negative economic disruption due to COVID-19, with a minimum of 30% decline in
turnover or customer orders over a 12 month period (extended from 6 months
under the Economic Recovery Plan). The review of turnover or orders should
look at the period as whole, not individual months. For new businesses, this
is based on a projected forward test.

If you are a charity that is getting special grant funding under the
Government’s Charity Stability Scheme, the funding may be excluded from the
definition of turnover in assessing your eligibility for the EWSS. You can
contact the Revenue division or branch responsible for your tax affairs for
further guidance.

If you are a registered childcare provider, you do not need to meet the 30%
reduction in turnover or customer orders test.

####  Re-qualification for EWSS

You can re-qualify for EWSS if your business had a 30% reduction in turnover
or customer orders during a particular reference period:

  * If your business was set up on or before 30 April 2019, the business must anticipate that the combined turnover for December 2021 and January 2022 will be down by at least 30%, compared with the combined turnover for December 2019 and January 2020. 
  * If your business was set up between 1 May 2019 and 31 December 2021, the business must anticipate that the average monthly turnover for December 2021 and January 2022 will be down by at least 30%, compared with the average monthly turnover from August 2021 to November 2021 

If you have a more complex business structure and need help determining your
eligibility for the scheme, you can get further guidance in Appendix I of [
Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/ewss-
guidelines.pdf) .

###  Eligible employees

The scheme was available for employers who keep staff on their payroll during
the period of the scheme.

There were no restrictions on taking on new employees or moving employees
under a transfer of undertaking, once these are undertaken for legitimate
business reasons and not to maximise subsidy claims.

Employees could be:

  * Temporarily not working or 
  * On reduced hours or reduced pay (or both) 

An employee who is receiving a EWSS payment and whose work is reduced to 3
days or less per week, may be entitled to [ Short Time Work Support
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/c20e1b-short-time-work-support/) which is a
form of [ Jobseeker’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) .

An eligible employer must be paying gross wages between €151.50 and €1,462
gross per week to qualify for EWSS ( **see Rates below** ).

Certain categories of employees were excluded from the EWSS. These were:

  * Proprietary directors (with certain exceptions – see below) 
  * Connected parties who were not on the payroll and paid at any time between July 2019 and June 2020 (Certain exceptions apply). See [ Revenue’s website ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/ewss/eligible-employees.aspx) for details. 

You could claim the subsidy for proprietary directors if:

  * You met the eligibility criteria for the EWSS 
  * The proprietary director was on your payroll 
  * You paid wages to the proprietary director which were reported to Revenue on your payroll between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2020 

Where a person is a proprietary director of 2 or more eligible companies, a
claim for the EWSS could only be submitted for a single company.

You can read additional guidance on eligible employees and excluded categories
in [ Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/ewss-
guidelines.pdf) .

###  Proofs required

Applications for EWSS were based on self-assessment principles. This means you
did not have to provide proof of eligibility to Revenue at the registration
stage. Revenue will review eligibility in the future, based on risk criteria -
see ‘Compliance checks’ below.

You should keep proof of your eligibility for the scheme (evidence of
reduction in turnover and other evidence). You can read detailed information
on the supporting proofs in Appendix I of [ Revenue’s EWSS Guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/ewss-
guidelines.pdf) .

###  Employer eligibility review

You had to undertake a review of your eligibility for the scheme. This had to
be done on the last day of every month (other than the final month of the
scheme). Online monthly EWSS Eligibility Review Form had to be completed and
submitted through ROS.

You can get more information on eligibility reviews in [ Revenue’s Guidelines
on eligibility for the EWSS from 1 July 2021 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/documents/ewss/guidelines-on-
eligibility-for-ewss.pdf) .

###  Compliance checks

Revenue contacted employers to check records relating to the operation of the
scheme including:

  * Evidence that you meet the eligibility criteria, specifically the reduction in turnover or customer orders test 
  * Details of monthly eligibility reviews 

###  Anti-abuse measures

Businesses can be penalised or face a possible criminal prosecution for
inappropriate accounting practices or for a false representation of the
financial situation of their business. You can get more information on these
anti-abuse measures in [ Revenue’s EWSS Guidance (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/ewss-
guidelines.pdf) .

##  Rates

**The EWSS closed on 31 May 2022. The information below can be used for
reference purposes.**

The subsidy amount paid to employers will depend on the gross income of each
employee.

EWSS gave a flat-rate subsidy to qualifying employers, based on the number of
qualifying employees on the payroll.

For most businesses, the following rates applied:

**Gross pay per week** |  **Rate from 20 Oct 2020 to 31 January 2022** |  **Rate from 01 February to 28 February 2022** |  **Rate from 01 March to 30 April 2022**  
---|---|---|---  
Less than €151.50  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies   
€151.50 - €202.99  |  €203  |  €151.50  |  €100   
€203 - €299.99  |  €250  |  €203  |  €100   
€300 - €399.99  |  €300  |  €203  |  €100   
€400 - €1,462  |  €350  |  €203  |  €100   
Over €1,462  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies   
  
For businesses directly impacted by the public health restrictions introduced
in December 2021, the following rates applied:

**Gross pay per week** |  **Rate from 20 Oct 2020 to 28 February 2022** |  **Rate from 01 March to 31 March 2022** |  **Rate from 01 April to 31 May 2022**  
---|---|---|---  
Less than €151.50  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies   
€151.50 - €202.99  |  €203  |  €151.50  |  €100   
€203 - €299.99  |  €250  |  €203  |  €100   
€300 - €399.99  |  €300  |  €203  |  €100   
€400 - €1,462  |  €350  |  €203  |  €100   
Over €1,462  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies  |  No subsidy applies   
  
###  Income tax and PRSI deductions

Under the EWSS employers must operate PAYE on all payments. This means
employers resumed the regular deduction of income tax, USC and employee PRSI
from your employees’ pay.

The full rate of Employers’ PRSI was reinstated from 1 March 2022.

##  How to apply

**The EWSS closed on 31 May 2022 and no new applications were accepted from
that date.**

##  Further information

You can get more background on the operation of the scheme in [ Revenue’s EWSS
Guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/ewss-
guidelines.pdf) .

_**Page edited:** 31 May 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employment%20Wage%20Subsidy%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employment%20Wage%20Subsidy%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Wage Subsidy Scheme for people with disabilities_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/)

The Wage Subsidy Scheme (WSS) offers financial support for employers who
employ people with disabilities.

2420.9258

  * [ _Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/covid19-temporary-wage-subsidy-scheme/)

The Temporary Wage Subsidy Scheme allowed employers to continue to pay their
employees during the COVID-19 pandemic. It was replaced by the Employment Wage
Subsidy Scheme.

2104.103

  * [ _Community Employment (CE) scheme_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/)

Community Employment helps people get back to work by offering part-time
placements in jobs based within local communities.

1206.4658

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

