**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [ Types
of employment ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/) > [ Self-employment
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/) > COVID Restrictions
Support Scheme

#  COVID Restrictions Support Scheme

  * Introduction 
  * Rules for CRSS 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

In Budget 2021, the Government announced a COVID Restrictions Support Scheme
(CRSS) to help support businesses. Generally, this scheme applied when
businesses were significantly restricted from operating due to [ public health
restrictions ](/en/health/covid19/living-with-covid19-plan/) .

Qualifying businesses could apply to Revenue for a cash payment of up to
€5,000 a week.

The scheme ran from 13 October 2020 until 31 January 2022.

**With the removal of public health restrictions from 22 January 2022,
businesses will no longer qualify for the CRSS** . Businesses can claim an
extra restart week payment for the week beginning 24 January 2022, to help
with the costs of reopening fully – see ‘Rates’ below.

This page is a summary of the CRSS rules and operation. You can get more
detailed guidance on the operation of the scheme in [ Revenue’s CRSS
Guidelines (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-office/budget-
information/2021/crss-guidelines.pdf) .

##  Rules for CRSS

####  Who can apply?

The scheme closed on 31 January 2022.

####  How do I qualify?

With the removal of public health restrictions from 22 January 2022,
businesses will no longer qualify for the CRSS.

Your business premises must be either closed to customers or substantially
restricted in operating due to COVID-19 restrictions. You must intend to
reopen once the restrictions have been lifted.

If you operate more than one business premises that are impacted, you can make
a claim in respect of each premises.

You must self-declare to Revenue that because of the COVID-19 restrictions,
turnover for the restricted period is disrupted by 75% compared to 2019
levels.

If your business was set up between 26 December 2019 and 12 October 2020, the
claim will be based on your actual weekly average turnover in the period
between the start–up date and 12 October 2020.

If your business was set up between 13 October 2020 and 26 July 2021, you can
now apply for the CRSS. The weekly payment will be calculated based on
turnover between the date your business commenced, and 26 July 2021. Read
Revenue’s [ guidelines on applying for CRSS (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-office/budget-
information/2021/crss-guidelines.pdf) , and see ‘Rates’ below.

**Tax clearance**

In order to receive a CRSS payment, you must:

  * Have a valid tax clearance certificate 
  * Meet your VAT obligations 

You can check your current tax clearance status online through ROS. Find [
more information on tax clearance ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-
business/tax-clearance/index.aspx) on the Revenue website.

##  Rates

###  Restart week payment

From 22 January 2022, with the removal of public health restrictions,
businesses are no longer restricted from operating. You will no longer qualify
for the CRSS.

For the week beginning 24 January 2022, you can claim an extra restart week
payment, to help with the costs of reopening fully.

The process for making a claim for the restart week payment is set out in
Section 7.2 and 7.3 of [ Revenue’s CRSS Guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-office/budget-
information/2021/crss-guidelines.pdf) .

###  CRSS payment rates

You could claim to Revenue under the CRSS for a cash payment known as an
Advance Credit for Trading Expenses (ACTE).

This payment was equal to 10% of your average weekly turnover in 2019 up to
€20,000 and 5% thereafter, subject to a maximum weekly payment of €5,000. See
table below.

**CRSS payments**  
---  
**Weekly turnover** |  **Rate** |  **Amount**  
First €20,000  |  10%  |  €2,000   
Next €60,000  |  5%  |  €3,000   
Maximum payment  |  |  €5,000   
  
If your business was established between 13 October 2020 and 26 July 2021, the
claim was based on 10% of your average weekly turnover in the period between
the date of commencement and 1 August 2021 (up to a maximum of €20,000).

You can claim 5% of your average weekly turnover for the reference period that
exceeds €20,000.

You can also get the Advance Credit for Trading Expenses (ACTE). This will
include your weekly amount, multiplied by the number of weeks in which the
restrictions are in place (up to €5,000 per week).

##  How to apply

There is a 2-step process to make a claim under the CRSS.

  1. You must register for the CRSS through [ Revenue’s Online Service (ROS) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/index.aspx) . You need to give details, such as the business location and the average weekly turnover for 2019 (or 2020 if your business started trading on or after 26 December 2019). Keep all supporting documentation that shows you meet the conditions of the CRSS. Revenue may request this information at a later date. 
  2. You must complete a CRSS claim for a _claim period_ or claim periods. The claim period is the period during which the qualifying COVID-19 restrictions are in place. You can make your claim through the claims portal for CRSS, which is available through the eRepayments system on [ ROS ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/index.aspx) . 

You must make your claim within 8 weeks of the date the claim period starts
(that is the date the restrictions start).

You must make your claim for the restart week payment within 8 weeks of the
date the restrictions are lifted.

You can find details of the start and end dates of claim periods in section
5.5 of [ Revenue’s CRSS Guidelines (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-office/budget-
information/2021/crss-guidelines.pdf) .

You can also find more detailed information on how to apply in [ Revenue’s
CRSS Guidelines (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-
office/budget-information/2021/crss-guidelines.pdf) .

##  Further information

You can get more help from Revenue through the [ myEnquiries
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/manage-your-
record/myenquiries.aspx) system or by calling the CRSS helpline Tel: 01 738
3663 (Monday to Friday, from 9.00am to 13.30pm).

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-restrictions-support-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=COVID%20Restrictions%20Support%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-restrictions-support-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-restrictions-support-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=COVID%20Restrictions%20Support%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-restrictions-support-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _COVID-19 restrictions in Ireland_ ](/en/health/covid19/living-with-covid19-plan/)

There are currently no COVID-19 restrictions in Ireland outside of healthcare
settings.

1671.363

  * [ _COVID-19 recovery and cost of living business supports_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-supports/)

This page summarises the supports for businesses as they recover from COVID-19
disruptions and deal with the rising costs of living.

1452.6732

  * [ _Youth Employment Support Scheme (YESS)_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/youth-employment-support-scheme/)

The Youth Employment Support Scheme (YESS) is closed. You may be interested in
the Work Placement Experience Programme (WPEP).

1094.6907

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

