**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ European education programmes ](/en/education/european-education-
programmes/) > Europass

#  Europass

  * What is Europass? 
  * My Europass profile 
  * Is there a fee for Europass? 
  * More information 

##  What is Europass?

Europass is an online platform that can help you find information about work
and learning opportunities in the EU. You can also use it to make your skills
and qualifications clearly understood by employers and educators in other [ EU
countries ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-
union/european-union/) .

Europass brings together a number of documents that both learners and workers
in the EU may need.

The documents include:

  * [ Europass CV ](https://europa.eu/europass/en/create-europass-cv)
  * [ Mobility Document ](https://europa.eu/europass/en/europass-mobility-stakeholders)
  * [ Certificate Supplement ](https://europa.eu/europass/en/europass-certificate-supplement-stakeholders)
  * [ Diploma Supplement ](https://europa.eu/europass/en/diploma-supplement-stakeholders)

These documents are helpful when you move between EU countries to work or
study. It can make it easier for employers to understand your qualifications
from another EU State.  

You can also use Europass to [ search for qualifications, courses and learning
opportunities ](https://europa.eu/europass/eportfolio/screen/course?lang=en)
in other EU countries.

##  My Europass profile

A [ Europass profile ](https://europa.eu/europass/en/europass-profile-tool-
help-people-manage-their-learning-and-careers) is a personal record of your
skills and qualifications. You can record your work, education, training,
language skills and achievements. You can use the information in your Europass
profile to create CVs for jobs or courses that you may be applying for.

To start using Europass, you can [ complete your profile
](https://europa.eu/europass/en) online.

The Europass platform allows you to keep [ digitally-signed credentials
](https://europa.eu/europass/en/europass-alati/european-digital-credentials) .
These are statements by a learning organisation documenting your learning.
These include diplomas, transcript records and other certificates.  

##  Is there a fee for Europass?

You can access the Europass platform for free. There is no charge to set up
your Europass profile and store documents.

There is no funding available under the Europass programme towards the costs
of training abroad. However, EU funding is available for mobility programmes
through [ Erasmus + ](/en/education/european-education-programmes/erasmus-
plus/) .

##  More information

For more information about Europass, contact the National Europass Centre. [
Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI) ](https://www.qqi.ie/about-us) is the
designated [ National Europass Centre in Ireland ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-
do/the-qualifications-system/europass) .

###  National Europass Centre

Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI)

26-27 Denzille Lane  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 905 8100

**Homepage:** [ https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/the-qualifications-
system/europass ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/the-qualifications-
system/europass)

**Email:** [ info@europass.ie ](mailto:info@europass.ie)

_**Page edited:** 29 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/europass/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Europass&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/europass/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/europass/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Europass&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/europass/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax on income that is not from your employer_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-return-non-paye-income/)

Some PAYE taxpayers have other sources of income. Information about how non-
PAYE income is taxed.

833.67145

  * [ _Compensation for overbooked, cancelled and delayed flights in the EU_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/compensation-for-overbooked-and-delayed-flights/)

Air passengers have specific consumer rights. Find out what happens if you are
denied access to an overbooked scheduled flight or your flight is cancelled or
delayed.

808.5022

  * [ _Complain about online platforms_ ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-online-platforms/)

Find out about your right to complain about illegal content, account
restrictions and targeted ads on online platforms.

794.8608

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

