**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/) >
Alternatives to redundancy

#  Alternatives to redundancy

  * Being offered ‘alternative work’ 
  * What is a reasonable alternative? 
  * Your options if your employer offers you another job 
  * Trying out alternative jobs 
  * If you don’t want to take an alternative job 
  * If you are not offered an alternative job 
  * Disputes about alternative work 
  * More information 

##  Being offered ‘alternative work’

Your employer must consult with you before deciding to make you [ redundant
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/what-is-redundancy/) .
This will normally involve:

  * Speaking to you about why you have been selected 
  * Looking at any alternatives to redundancy 

Before your employer makes you redundant, they might offer you another job in
the business. This is known as ‘alternative work’.

The alternative work should be a reasonable offer. Generally speaking,
alternatives which involve you losing status or getting worse terms and
conditions would not be reasonable.

You may not be entitled to claim a redundancy payment if your employer offers
you suitable alternative work which you refuse without good reason.

###  How you should get an alternative job offer

Your employer should give you any offer of alternative work **in writing** if
they want to rely on the offer to avoid making a redundancy payment.

You are entitled to full information about the offer. The job must actually be
offered to you - you should not have to apply. The new job must start within 4
weeks of the old job ending.

##  What is a reasonable alternative?

What is reasonable depends on the facts of each case.

Generally, an alternative is not reasonable if you:

  * Lose status (for example, you were a senior manager and are offered a junior role) 
  * Have worse terms and conditions of employment (for example, lower pay) 
  * Have to travel an unreasonable distance to work 

##  Your options if your employer offers you another job

If your employer makes you an alternative job offer you can:

  * Accept the alternative job offer 
  * Take up the alternative job on a trial basis 
  * Refuse the alternative job offer 

You **are not entitled to claim redundancy** if you:

  * Accept a new contract or re-engagement with immediate effect, and the terms of employment are the same as your previous contract 
  * Accept an offer in writing from your employer for a new and different contract which will start within 4 weeks of your previous contract ending 

You **may lose your entitlement to a redundancy payment** if you refuse a
reasonable alternative job offer without good reason.

##  Trying out alternative jobs

If you accept the offer of alternative work, you can get a 4-week trial period
to see if the work is suitable.

The trial period can be longer than 4 weeks if you and your employer agree
this in writing (for example, if you need training to do the new job).

You can try out an alternative role without giving up your right to redundancy
pay.

If the alternative role means your hours or pay have been reduced by 50% or
more, you can do the role for up to 52 weeks without it counting as your
acceptance.

##  If you don’t want to take an alternative job

You might not want to take the alternative job - for example if it pays less
or it is a different type of work.

But if the job offer is reasonable (see above) and you refuse it without good
reason, you may lose your entitlement to a redundancy payment.

A good reason could be about the job itself or about your personal situation.
You might give reasons like:

  * Lower pay 
  * Longer journey to work or lack of public transport 
  * Extra costs of getting to work 

If you have good reason to refuse the alternative job offer and are dismissed
as a result, you may be entitled to claim [ statutory redundancy
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-payments/)
or [ unfair dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) .

If there is a dispute as to whether a job is suitable, or whether your refusal
is unreasonable, you can bring a claim to the [ Workplace Relations
Commission. ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-relations-
commission/)

##  If you are not offered an alternative job

Ask your employer for an explanation if you think they have alternative jobs
but you are not offered any by the time your current job ends.

If your employer does not have a good reason for not offering you an
alternative job you might be able to claim for unfair selection or
discrimination under [ unfair dismissal legislation
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) .

##  Disputes about alternative work

If there is a dispute about whether a job offer was suitable or whether your
refusal is unreasonable resulting in the refusal of the redundancy payment by
the employer, you can bring a complaint to the [ Workplace Relations
Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-relations-
commission/) .

You should complain using the WRC the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
. Complaints must about the refusal of a redundancy payment must generally be
brought within 12 months. This time limit can be extended.

If your employer does not have a good reason for not offering you an
alternative job you might be able to claim [ unfair dismissal.
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/)

##  More information

You can get more information about your employment rights from the [ Workplace
Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-
relations-commission/) . You can contact their Information and Customer
service – see below.

###  The laws on redundancy

The laws on redundancy are set out in the [ Redundancy Payments Acts
1967–2014.
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1967_0021.htm)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 2 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/alternatives-to-
redundancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Alternatives%20to%20redundancy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/alternatives-to-
redundancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/alternatives-to-
redundancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Alternatives%20to%20redundancy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/alternatives-to-
redundancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet on calculating your redundancy payment_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/worksheet-on-calculating-your-redundancy-payment/)

Your redundancy lump sum is calculated according a certain formula based on
your years of service in an employment. This worksheet is to help you work it
out for yourself.

1157.9342

  * [ _Tax on income that is not from your employer_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-return-non-paye-income/)

Some PAYE taxpayers have other sources of income. Information about how non-
PAYE income is taxed.

991.9081

  * [ _Problems getting your redundancy pay_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-pay/)

Your employer should pay the redundancy lump sum to you when your employment
ends. Get advice if you are having problems getting your redundancy pay.

961.47894

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

