**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Educational supports ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/educational-supports/) > Early school leaver programmes

#  Early school leaver programmes

  * Are you an early school leaver? 
  * Supports for early school leavers 
  * How to apply 

##  Are you an early school leaver?

You are an early school leaver if you stop going to school school before
reaching the age of 16 years or before completing 3 years post-primary
education, whichever is later.

Young people who leave school without a recognised qualification are at a
disadvantage in the labour market and are at increased risk of poverty and
social exclusion.

  
If you have left school early and would like to get further education and
training, there are a number of supports in place. These are non-formal
education facilities that aim to provide high quality, relevant and efficient
education and training opportunities outside the mainstream education setting.

###  School completion programme

The [ School Completion Programme (SCP)
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/educational-welfare-services/scp/) helps
students from disadvantaged areas stay in school to complete their Leaving
Certificate.

SCP is part of the Department of Education social inclusion strategy [
Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools (DEIS)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/4018ea-deis-delivering-equality-of-
opportunity-in-schools/) which helps children and young people at risk of [
educational disadvantage ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-attendance/) to have
better opportunities.

Each project is managed by a local management committee and provides a
tailored programme of in-school, after school and holiday-time interventions
to targeted children and young people who are at risk of early school leaving.

###

###

##  Supports for early school leavers

Young people who leave school early are at a greater risk of poverty and
social exclusion. If you have left school early, there are a number of
supports to help you return to education and get a qualification.

###  Youthreach programme

[ Youthreach ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/youthreach/) helps
young people return to learning and prepare for employment and adult life. It
also provides them with opportunities to get certified qualifications. The
programme is aimed at unemployed early school leavers aged 15 to 20. The
Youthreach programme is delivered through Youthreach centres and [ Community
Training Centres ](http://www.iacto.ie/learners/ctcs/) .

###  Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme  

The [ Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme (VTOS) ](/en/education/further-
education-and-training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) is a special
range of courses designed to meet the education needs of unemployed people who
are early school-leavers.

The scheme gives you a choice of options from basic education and training to
advanced [ further education and training ](/en/education/further-education-
and-training/) . It is for people over 21 who have been getting unemployment
payments or [ signing for credits ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) for at
least 6 months. It is delivered through the [ Education and Training Boards
(ETBs) ](https://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) at centres all over
Ireland.

###  **Back to Education Initiative**

The [ Back to Education Initiative ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/back-to-education-initiative/) provides opportunities for second
chance education to adult learners and early school leavers who want to get
skills for work. It includes [ adult literacy schemes ](/en/education/further-
education-and-training/adult-literacy/) , [ Post Leaving Certificate (PLC)
](/en/education/further-education-and-training/post-leaving-certificate-
courses/) courses and [ further education and training
](/en/education/further-education-and-training/) .

###

##  How to apply

For more details about the entry requirements, you should contact the
individual programmes.

For Youthreach contact your [ local Educational and Training Board (ETB)
](https://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) or your local [ Community
Training Centre. ](http://www.iacto.ie/ctcs/ctc-locations/)

Contact [ your local ETB ](http://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) for
details of adult literacy, adult education programmes and VTOS.

_**Page edited:** 7 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/early-school-leavers-
programmes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Early%20school%20leaver%20programmes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/early-school-leavers-
programmes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/early-school-leavers-
programmes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Early%20school%20leaver%20programmes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/early-school-leavers-
programmes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Early Start Pre-School Programme_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/early-start/)

Early Start is a programme designed to boost educational achievement among
disadvantaged three- and four-year-old children.

1262.4275

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

1082.5525

  * [ _Early Childhood Care and Education Scheme (ECCE)_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-scheme/)

The ECCE scheme provides up to 2 years of early childhood care and education
for children of pre-school age.

921.2388

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

