**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Environment and the law ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/) > Aarhus
Convention

#  Aarhus Convention

  * What is the Aarhus Convention? 
  * What are the key elements of the Aarhus Convention? 
  * How is the Aarhus Convention implemented? 
  * What other agreements relate to the Aarhus Convention? 

##  What is the Aarhus Convention?

The [ Aarhus Convention ](https://ec.europa.eu/environment/aarhus/) is an
international agreement that gives people the right to access information
about the environment. It also promotes public participation in decision-
making and provides access to justice on environmental matters.

[ Ireland ratified the Aarhus Convention
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b3b1a-aarhus-convention/) and [ 2 related
agreements in 2012
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2003/si/500/made/en/print#ld5b00) , which
we describe below.

[ Read an Irish translation of the Aarhus Convention
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/96750/c5f9fd54-31fc-4e64-8a05-0119f4e272aa.pdf#page=null)
.

##  What are the key elements of the Aarhus Convention?

The convention gives you the following 3 rights:

###  1\. You can access environmental information

Anybody can [ request information about the environment
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/1e52cb-access-to-information-
on-the-environment-aie/#making-a-request) that is held by, or for, a public
organisation. You must get this information within one month of your request
and do not have to say why you need it.

This includes information about:

  * The state of the environment 
  * Human health issues 
  * Policies and measures taken by the public organisation 

Find out more about [ Access to environmental information
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/1e52cb-access-to-information-
on-the-environment-
aie/#:~:text=The%20government%20ensures%20that%20members,authorities%20under%20the%20AIE%20Regulations.)
.

###  2\. You can take part in environmental decision-making

Members of the public can take part in making decisions where there may be an
environmental impact. This includes decisions about:

  * Planning 
  * Environmental licences 
  * Foreshore licences 
  * Waste licences 
  * Integrated Pollution Prevention Control (IPPC) licences 

The public authorities that make these decisions must publish notices telling
the public how they can give feedback. The public authorities must then
consider this feedback when making decisions.

###  3\. You can access justice

Members of the public and environmental non-governmental organisations can ask
for a review of decisions from the public authority which may affect the
environment. The review procedures must provide “adequate and effective
remedies ... and be fair, equitable, timely and not prohibitively expensive”.

Normally, when the law allows for an administrative appeal against a planning
or environmental decision, the appeal should be made first to the public
authority. After you complete the standard appeal process, you can apply to
the High Court for a [ judicial review ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-
government-works/standards-and-accountability/judicial-review-public-
decisions/) of a decision.

For example, if you want to appeal a planning decision made by a local
authority, you would normally appeal to An Bord Pleanála first.

[ See courts.ie for more information on judicial reviews
](https://www.courts.ie/judicial-review) .

##  How is the Aarhus Convention implemented?

There are 2 EU directives that implement the Convention:

  1. [ Directive 2003/4/EC on Public Access to Environmental Information (pdf) ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:041:0026:0032:EN:PDF)
  2. [ Directive 2003/35/EC on Public Participation ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32003L0035)

Both directives have been fully implemented in Ireland which means they fully
apply.

Additional measures were included in the [ Environment (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2011/act/20/enacted/en/html) to implement
parts of the Convention. This Act introduced new rules about the costs that
apply in certain cases where environmental information has been requested. The
Act also states that a judge must take notice of the Convention in relevant
cases.

###  Aarhus Compliance Committee

The Convention established a [ Compliance Committee
](https://unece.org/environment-policy/public-participation/aarhus-
convention/compliance-committee) to review compliance and decide on possible
breaches of the Convention. Since the committee was set up, it has made a [
number of findings ](https://unece.org/environment-policy/public-
participation/aarhus-convention/compliance-committee-meetings) in relation to
compliance by individual members of the Convention.

##  What other agreements relate to the Aarhus Convention?

Since the Convention was ratified, there have been 2 further agreements that
relate to the Convention:

###  Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers

The [ Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a4642-protocol-on-pollutant-release-and-
transfer-registers-prtr-national-implementation-reports/) commits
participating countries to establishing and maintaining publicly accessible
registers with information on pollutants from certain environmentally
significant activities, such as mining and the disposal of waste.

A Pollutant Release and Transfer Register (PRTR) is a national or regional
environmental database. It lists all the potentially hazardous chemical
substances and pollutants released into the air, water and soil, and
transferred for treatment or disposal.

In Ireland the [ Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) manages Ireland’s PRTR
](https://www.epa.ie/our-services/compliance--enforcement/whats-
happening/pollutant-release-and-transfer-register/) . It contains information
about emissions from more than 300 industrial facilities across the State and
enables members of the public to find out about the major sources of emissions
in their locality.

###  Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) Amendment to the Convention

The [ GMO Amendment to the Convention
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b3b1a-aarhus-convention/#convention-
protocols) means that there must be public participation in decisions about
the deliberate release of [ genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/26f183-environmental-
policy/#genetically-modified-organisms-gmos) . These requirements are more
specific than the general requirements relating to public participation which
apply to other issues covered by the Aarhus Convention.

‘Deliberate release’ means placing genetically modified (GM) products on the
market, or the cultivation of GM crops. It does not include the use of GMOs in
controlled settings, such as laboratories.

The GMO Amendment was implemented in the EU by [ Directive 2001/18/EC on the
Deliberate Release of GMOs ](https://www.epa.ie/our-
services/licensing/gmo/deliberate-release/) . This directive became law in
Ireland through the [ Genetically Modified Organisms (Deliberate Release)
Regulations 2003 (SI 500 of 2003)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2003/si/500/made/en/print) .

_**Page edited:** 2 June 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/aarhus-convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Aarhus%20Convention&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/aarhus-convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/aarhus-convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Aarhus%20Convention&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/aarhus-convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Convention on the Constitution_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitutional-convention/)

The Constitutional Convention was set up in 2012 to consider possible changes
to the Constitution. Several of its recommendations resulted in constitutional
amendments.

1526.0928

  * [ _UN Convention on the Rights of the Child_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-of-the-child/)

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out the basic human rights
to which every child is entitled. Ireland ratified the Convention on 28
September 1992. Find out more.

1493.0529

  * [ _Judicial review in planning and environmental matters_ ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/judicial-review-in-planning-and-environmental-matters/)

Public decisions may be judicially reviewed by the High Court to determine
whether they are illegal. Find out about judicial review in the environmental
and planning areas.

696.98914

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

