**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Health and safety in your environment ](/en/environment/buildings-and-
structures/) > Asbestos

#  Asbestos

  * What is asbestos? 
  * Where is asbestos found? 
  * How to deal with asbestos 
  * Protecting yourself or your employees from asbestos in work 
  * Prohibition notices of dangerous work 
  * Useful contacts 

##  What is asbestos?

Asbestos is a name given to many different naturally occurring minerals, made
up of long thin fibres, which can be dangerous if they are inhaled as dust.

Until 1999, asbestos was commonly used in building materials, mainly for
insulation and fireproofing, and in some consumer goods. However, it is now [
illegal to place asbestos or asbestos-containing products on the market
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/si/0220.html) .

So, for example, if you are having a roof removed by specialists that contains
asbestos, the material must be disposed of and cannot be re-used in any way.

##  Where is asbestos found?

Asbestos can be found in any old building which was built or refurbished
before 2000. It was commonly used as a means of insulating and fireproofing,
but it was also used in a variety of different formats. As a result, it can be
found in building materials used for:

  * Flooring 
  * Walls 
  * Ceilings 
  * Roofs 
  * Heating systems and equipment 

**What happens if I am exposed to asbestos?**

Being exposed to asbestos can cause different health issues. Many of these can
take between 15-60 years to develop. These include an increased risk of:

  * Lung cancer 
  * Asbestosis (scarring of the lung tissue) 
  * Mesothelioma (cancer of the lining of the chest and the lining of the abdominal cavity) 
  * Pleural plagues/effusions 

##  How to deal with asbestos

If you think that a material may contain asbestos, or if you are arranging to
have building work done on your home, you should get advice from a specialist
asbestos monitoring/surveying company. This will help you identify whether
asbestos is present and decide what to do next. You should never handle,
disturb or remove asbestos-containing materials (ACMs) yourself.

Asbestos does not always have to be removed and disposed of. If the asbestos
is in good condition and there is no disturbance or damage to it, it won’t
cause any harm as the fibres will not be released. Sometimes, it can be safer
to maintain it rather than disturbing the asbestos by removing it. This
decision should be based on a risk assessment, carried out by a specialist.

If asbestos is to be repaired and maintained, this must be done safely and by
a specialist. Any remaining material should be clearly labelled for asbestos
and its location should be clearly marked on the plans of the building for
future reference.

Removing asbestos is a complex procedure and must only be done by a specialist
contractor. Asbestos waste is hazardous and improper removal will increase the
risk of fibre inhalation. There are detailed rules about how the waste should
be wrapped, labelled, and disposed of.

You can find [ more information on asbestos
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/your_industry/chemicals/legislation_enforcement/asbestos/legislation_and_guidance/asbestos_legislation/)
on the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) website and also in these [
practical guidelines from the Health and Safety Authority (pdf)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Chemical_and_Hazardous_Substances/asbestos_guidelines.pdf)
.

##  Protecting yourself or your employees from asbestos in work

There are [ regulations
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/your_industry/chemicals/legislation_enforcement/asbestos/legislation_and_guidance/asbestos_legislation/)
in place protecting workers from risks related to asbestos exposure at work.
They apply to all places of work and all sectors of work where asbestos-
containing materials may be present, and to everyone who may be at risk from
exposure when at work.

The [ Health and Safety Authority (HSA) ](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/) enforces
these regulations. While the HSA deals specifically with worker protection and
the industrial sector, if you are having work done in your home then it can be
deemed a workplace, and people working there must get the required level of
protection for them to do their work safely.

**What is the exposure limit for asbestos?**

The maximum level of daily exposure to which workers may be exposed at a
workplace is defined in law. This exposure limit is 0.1 fibres per cm3 for all
types of asbestos (or 100 fibres per litre of air).

If planned asbestos–related work could expose you or other workers to a higher
concentration of asbestos fibres in the air, your employer must submit a
written notification to the HSA 14 days before starting any work.

Employers who are responsible for people working in an environment with
possible asbestos must act to protect their employees’ health. The steps to be
taken include:

  * Identify any asbestos before work begins and plan the work to disturb them as little as possible 
  * Prepare a written risk assessment and a written plan of work or method statement 
  * Tell employees the results of any measurement of asbestos dust in the air in their work area 
  * Prevent employees' exposure to asbestos or do everything possible to keep the amount of asbestos in the air to a minimum 
  * Use specialist contractors for any work that involves significant risk of exposure – these specialists must use suitable controls, such as dust extractors and decontamination units 
  * Provide suitable protective gear for the type of work and the level of asbestos in the air 
  * Provide information, instruction and training, so that employees know what risks are involved and what precautions they should take 
  * Properly dispose of any waste that contains asbestos 

You can find detailed information and advice in the HSA’s [ practical
guidelines (pdf)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Chemical_and_Hazardous_Substances/asbestos_guidelines.pdf)
on how to manage and contain asbestos in workplaces.

The HSA has also published an [ Asbestos Information Sheet
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Chemical_and_Hazardous_Substances/Asbestos_Information_Sheet.html)
, aimed at employees and safety representatives, as well as employers.

**Site inspections**

The HSA can inspect sites where work with asbestos is being carried out.
Inspectors can visit a site without giving notice and they must be given full
access to all areas of that site to ensure that regulations are being met.

The HSA’s inspectors can close down a site immediately if they believe that
dangerous practices are in place. They can place a prohibition notice on the
site or specific operation. This notice remains in place until the problem has
been fixed.

##  Prohibition notices of dangerous work

A prohibition notice is a legal order to stop specific work because of the
high level of perceived danger it is causing. If you don’t take action and
don’t meet the requirements outlined in a prohibition notice, the HSA can
prosecute you in court.

If you are convicted of an offence under the Asbestos Regulations, the court
can fine you. The court can also order you to take the necessary steps to fix
the situation within a specific deadline. It is an offence if you don’t follow
these steps.

Local authorities are responsible for investigating incidents of air and water
pollution, which includes incorrect disposal of asbestos. They can prosecute
infringements of the [ Air Pollution Act 1987
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1987/en/act/pub/0006/index.html) and the [
Local Government (Water Pollution) Act 1977
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1977/en/act/pub/0001/index.html) . Anyone who
is found to be in breach of this legislation is guilty of an offence.

##  Useful contacts

You can find lists of asbestos specialists and contractors on the websites of
the [ Environmental Protection Agency ](http://www.epa.ie/) , and the [ Health
and Safety Authority ](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/) .

The Environmental Protection Agency also have a useful document on [ Best
practice guidance for handling asbestos (pdf)
](https://www.epa.ie/publications/monitoring--assessment/waste/hazardous-
waste/LGI_HandlingAsbestosGuide.pdf) .

To make sure that a waste collection company is licensed to handle asbestos
waste, check with the [ National Waste Collection Permit Office
](http://www.nwcpo.ie/) .

If your concerns relate to a workplace or work activity, contact the Health
and Safety Authority.

If you are concerned about asbestos in public areas, contact the Environmental
Officer in your [ local authority ](https://www.housing.gov.ie/local-
government/administration/local-authorities/local-authorities) .

Contact the [ Department of Education
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education/) with any
concerns about the presence of asbestos in schools.

The [ Office of Public Works ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/office-of-
public-works/) is responsible for dealing with asbestos in other State
buildings.

_**Page edited:** 6 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/asbestos-regulations/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Asbestos&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/asbestos-regulations/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/asbestos-regulations/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Asbestos&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/asbestos-regulations/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The It Makes Sense loan_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/microcredit-loans/)

This low-interest loan from participating credit unions is available to people
who get a social welfare payment.

504.1189

  * [ _Being released from prison_ ](/en/justice/prison-system/being-released-from-prison/)

Find out about remission, temporary release and parole, as well as the systems
in place to aid the resettlement of prisoners into the community.

495.06708

  * [ _Anti-social behaviour by children_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-children/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 introduced provisions for dealing with anti-
social behaviour by children. These provisions allow the Gardaí to deal with
anti-social behaviour in a number of ways.

438.34338

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

