**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Farming and managing land ](/en/environment/land/) > Forestry in Ireland

#  Forestry in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Forestry grants and schemes 
  * Millennium Forests 
  * More information on forestry in Ireland 

##  Introduction

Forestry in Ireland has been severely affected by clearance and exploitation.
The total forest area in Ireland is 11.6% of the landscape. Around 49.1% of
this is in public ownership, mainly [ Coillte ](https://www.coillte.ie/) .

Just under 2% of Irish forestry is native forestry.

Carefully planted and managed forests increase the area’s [ biodiversity
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/pets-and-
wildlife/protection-of-nature-and-biodiversity/) , creating a huge range of
habitats for wild fauna and flora.

Managing and using forests in a way that maintains their rich variety of life
forms, their economic and social functions and their capacity to re-grow is
called sustainable forest management. Trees are planted, allowed to mature,
harvested, then re-planted and naturally re-generated in a continuous growth
cycle.

Farm forestry provides an alternative income that helps sustain farming
communities, promotes rural development and enables people to remain on their
land.

Many different grants are available for people who want to plant trees.

##  Forestry grants and schemes

There are several [ schemes for forestry.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-grants-and-
schemes/#b1d8f8) Some provide grants to help people develop new forests and
others are for people managing existing forests.

**Establishing new forests**

The schemes for developing new forestry aim at increasing Ireland’s forest
cover and counter climate change.

The 2 main grants for planting new forestry on your land are the following:

  * [ Afforestation Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/afforestation-scheme/)
  * [ Native Tree Area Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/native-tree-area-scheme/)

These were announced in the [ Forestry Programme 2023-2027 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/268252/59e8729c-9e6a-4221-bbc6-d1a5d9fa2f44.pdf) .

You should hire a registered forester to submit your application on your
behalf. Check Gov.ie for a [ list of registered foresters and forestry
companies ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/205869-list-of-registered-
foresters/) .

**Managing existing forests**

If you already have forestry, there are a number of grants available to help
you manage the land, depending on your situation.

These include the:

  * [ Native Woodland Conservation Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/b54d3-native-woodland-conservation-scheme/)
  * [ Woodland Improvement Scheme 2023-2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/56cc6-woodland-improvement-scheme-2023-2027/)
  * [ Deer Tree Shelter, Hare and Deer Fencing Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/36f02-deer-tree-shelter-hare-and-deer-fencing-scheme/)
  * [ Forestry Knowledge Transfer Group Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/317e0-forestry-knowledge-transfer-group-scheme-2023/) (this scheme is currently closed but is expected to reopen later this year) 
  * [ Forest Road Scheme 2023-2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9d223-forest-road-scheme-2023-2027/)
  * [ Innovative Forest Technology Scheme - Module 2: Investment Aid for the Development of the Forest Tree Nursery Sector 2023-2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/2d474-innovative-forest-technology-scheme-module-2-investment-aid-for-the-development-of-the-forest-tree-nursery-sector-2023-2027/)
  * [ Reconstitution Ash Dieback Scheme 2023-2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/15355-reconstitution-ash-dieback-scheme-2023-2027/)
  * [ Climate Resilient Reforestation Pilot Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/c1ae7-climate-resilient-reforestation-pilot-scheme/)

##  Millennium Forests

As part of the millennium (year 2000) celebrations, over 1,500 acres of native
woodland were designated as "People's Millennium Forests". This native
woodland is divided into 16 forests around the country and includes newly
planted native forestry and restored native woodlands.

Under this initiative, a native tree was planted on behalf of each household
in Ireland. A total of 1.2 million native trees were planted. Every home was
issued with a certificate giving details about the tree and its location.

It is not possible to locate individual trees, but your household will still
be able to find which forest your tree was planted in. You can [ check which
forest your tree is located online.
](http://www.millenniumforests.com/location.html)

[ Coillte ](http://www.coillte.ie/) manages the [ People's Millennium Forest
project ](http://www.millenniumforests.com/index.html) in partnership with the
[ Woodlands of Ireland ](http://www.woodlandsofireland.com/) and the [ Forest
Service
](http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/forestservice/forestservicegeneralinformation/)
.

##  More information on forestry in Ireland

For more information on Coillte and to find out where to visit the Coillte-run
site, visit the [ Coillte website ](https://www.coillte.ie/) .

Gov.ie has [ useful information on forest health, forestry regulation and more
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/regulation-forest-health-and-resources/) .

You can find a [ list of registered foresters
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/205869-list-of-registered-foresters/) on
gov.ie.

_**Page edited:** 19 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/millennium-
forests-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Forestry%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/millennium-
forests-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/millennium-
forests-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Forestry%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/millennium-
forests-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Getting around when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to get around when you return to Ireland,
including public transport services, taxis, car rental, driving licences, tram
services and more.

1092.8706

  * [ _Help to go home for migrants in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/help-to-go-home-for-migrants-in-ireland/)

The voluntary return programme helps undocumented migrants and people who
don’t have permission to remain in Ireland to return home.

1080.2167

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

951.34546

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

