**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ European education programmes ](/en/education/european-education-
programmes/) > Erasmus +

#  Erasmus +

  * What is Erasmus+? 
  * What country can I travel to with Erasmus+? 
  * What costs does Erasmus+ cover? 
  * What projects does Erasmus+ fund? 
  * How to apply for Erasmus+ 
  * When to apply for Erasmus+ 
  * Other EU funded opportunities 

##  What is Erasmus+?

Erasmus+ is an EU programme that can help you travel to experience work, study
or train in another country. Your time abroad on Erasmus+ can be from 2 days
to 30 days or from 2 weeks to a year depending on the type of project you are
on.

Erasmus+ is open to many people including:

  * Pupils in school 
  * Students in higher education 
  * Students in vocational education and training 
  * Young people in youth organisations 
  * Adult learners 

Staff in educational settings and youth workers can also access Erasmus+.

You cannot apply directly to Erasmus+. You must apply through a participating
organisation such as your school or college or place of work.

If the application is successful, you will get funding that usually covers
your travel costs and the cost of living abroad. You may get funding to cover
other costs too.

You can also get [ Online Linguistic Support
](https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/erasmus-plus/resources/online-linguistic-
support_en) to help you learn the language you will use when you are abroad
with Erasmus+.

The year you turn 18 years old you can apply for a [ DiscoverEU rail pass
](https://europa.eu/youth/discovereu_en) as part of Erasmus+, if you are an EU
citizen.

You can find out more about Erasmus+ on the website, [ erasmusplus.ie
](http://erasmusplus.ie/) .

##  What country can I travel to with Erasmus+?

You can go to any EU country and some countries outside of the EU with
Erasmus+.

Programme countries are eligible for all parts of Erasmus+. Programme
countries include all EU member states, Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein, the
Republic of North Macedonia, Turkey and Serbia.

Partner countries can take part in some aspects and must meet specific
conditions.

The European Commission website has a [ list of countries that can take part
in Erasmus+ ](https://erasmus-plus.ec.europa.eu/programme-
guide/part-a/eligible-countries) .

####  **Northern Ireland students**

The UK ended its participation in the Erasmus+ programme on 31 December 2020.

The Irish Government will [ support higher education students in Northern
Ireland to avail of mobilities and internships across Europe.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/29934-minister-harris-announces-
mobility-funding-for-northern-ireland-higher-education-students/)

##  What costs does Erasmus+ cover?

You will generally get Erasmus+ funding to help cover your travel costs and
living expenses such as accommodation and food. Any costs not related to these
you will have to cover yourself. The amount of funding you get depends on the
type of project you are on.

Extra funding is available to support people with disabilities and from
disadvantaged backgrounds.

Higher education students will not have to pay fees for tuition, registration,
examinations, and charges for access to laboratories or libraries in the
institution where they are studying with Erasmus+. Fees for insurance or
student union membership may still apply.

You can find information on grant levels and types of funding in the [
Erasmus+ Programme Guide ](https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/erasmus-
plus/resources/programme-guide_en) . You may get additional grants from your
institution, government or other sources. Check the [ European Funding Guide
](http://www.european-funding-guide.eu/) .

##  What projects does Erasmus+ fund?

Only organisations can apply for Erasmus+ funding. This includes schools,
higher education and training institutes, youth and sport organisations.

Applications from participating organisations must support one or more of the
four priorities of the Erasmus+ programme 2021-2027.

  * Inclusive Erasmus+ aims to ensure equal opportunities for everyone 
  * Digital Erasmus+ aims to develop accessible and high-quality digital learning and training 
  * Green Erasmus+ encourages participants to build knowledge and understanding of sustainability and climate change and to use lower carbon transport 
  * Erasmus+ participation in democratic life supports active engagement in society 

If you are at school, you can spend time abroad studying at a partner school.
You can also go as part of a group to learn with other school students abroad.

If you are in higher education, your study period abroad can combine with a
traineeship.

If you are a trainee or apprentice, you can be hosted in a workplace or in
another institution for trainees for work-based learning. Your traineeship can
last from 2 weeks to 12 months.

If you are an adult learner, you can spend time at an adult learning
organisation which may include class or work-based learning or job-shadowing.
You can also study abroad as part of a group.

Young people in youth organisations and volunteers can travel for training or
a youth exchange and take part in workshops, debates and outdoor activities.

Internship vacancies are offered by companies and organisations on
Erasmusintern.org website.

You can find information on all [ projects funded under the Erasmus+ programme
](https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/erasmus-plus/projects/) on the Erasmus+
Project Results platform.

##  How to apply for Erasmus+

###  School children

If you are in a school, applications for Erasmus+ must be made through your
school. The school must be fair, inclusive and transparent when selecting
candidates for Erasmus+.

Your school can apply to Erasmus+ directly or through a [ consortium of
schools ](https://erasmus-plus.ec.europa.eu/opportunities/individuals/staff-
training/school-education-staff-training) .

Your school can explore Erasmus+ opportunities through the [ eTwinning
platform ](https://school-education.ec.europa.eu/en/etwinning) and the [
School Education Gateway ](https://www.erasmustrainingcourses.com/school-
education-gateway.html) .

###  Students in higher education institutions

If you are a student at third-level, you can apply for your Erasmus+,
traineeship or a combined Erasmus+ and traineeship through the international
or Erasmus+ office of your higher education institution.

You must be registered in a higher education institution and studying for a
recognised degree or third level qualification and be in at least your second
year. The study abroad or traineeship must be [ relevant to your degree or
your personal development needs ](https://erasmus-
plus.ec.europa.eu/opportunities/individuals/students/studying-abroad) .

If you are a recent graduate, you must be selected for a traineeship during
your last year of study and must complete the traineeship within one year of
graduating.

If you have completed a primary degree you can apply for an [ Erasmus Mundus
Joint Masters Scholarship ](https://erasmus-
plus.ec.europa.eu/opportunities/individuals/students/erasmus-mundus-joint-
masters-scholarships) .

You can do an Erasmus+ many times. However, you can only do one Erasmus+
during each Bachelor, Masters, Doctoral degree or equivalent.

###  Vocational education and training (VET) learners or apprentices

If you are an apprentice or attending a vocational education and training
(VET) course, contact Leargas for information on organisations or employers
that you can apply for Erasmus with.

Your local Education and Training Board (ETB) would be considered a VET
organisation for Erasmus+. Leargas publishes a [ list of vocational education
and training (VET) organisations that are eligible for Erasmus+
](https://www.leargas.ie/resource/erasmus-vet-ka1-eligible-
organisations-2023/) .

###  Youth participants, volunteers and youth workers

Young people in youth organisations or volunteers should apply through a [
youth organisation or group ](https://www.leargas.ie/application-
process/a-quick-guide-to-erasmus-plus-european-solidarity-corps-eligibility/)
.

You can find Information on Erasmus+ and other [ youth opportunities
](https://www.leargas.ie/explore-youth-opportunities/) on the Léargas website.

##  When to apply for Erasmus+

There are generally two application deadlines for organisations each year, one
in spring and one in autumn.

Application dates for schools, vocational education and training,
apprenticeships, adult education and youth organisations are published on the
[ Léargas website ](https://www.leargas.ie/application-process/deadlines/) .

Applications dates for higher education institutes are published on the Higher
Education Authority’s Erasmus+ website [ euireland.ie
](https://eurireland.ie/) .

##  Other EU funded opportunities

Young people can take part in [ volunteering projects and solidarity projects
](https://www.leargas.ie/european-solidarity-corps/) in Ireland or in another
country through a different programme called the European Solidarity Corps.
You can register on the [ European Solidarity Corps Portal
](https://europa.eu/youth/solidarity_en) or visit europeansolidarity.ie to
find out more.

You can find opportunities to travel, work, study and volunteer in Europe on [
Eurodesk.ie ](https://eurodesk.eu/about/) .

Young people and youth organisations can find information on the [ European
youth portal ](https://europa.eu/youth/home_en) and [ Youthpass
](https://www.youthpass.eu/en/) websites.

###  Higher Education Authority (HEA)

International Education Section

3 Shelbourne Buildings  
Crampton Avenue  
Shelbourne Road  
Dublin 4  
D04C2Y6

**Tel:** 01 2317 100

**Homepage:** [ https://eurireland.ie/ ](https://eurireland.ie/)

**Email:** [ erasmus@hea.ie ](mailto:erasmus@hea.ie)

EURIreland.ie is the Erasmus+ for Higher Education website, managed by the
HEA.

###  Léargas

Kings Inn House  
Parnell Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 A3Y8  
Ireland

**Fax:** (01) 873 1316

**Homepage:** [ https://www.leargas.ie/ ](https://www.leargas.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@leargas.ie ](mailto:info@leargas.ie)

_**Page edited:** 7 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/erasmus-plus/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Erasmus%20%2B&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/erasmus-plus/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/erasmus-plus/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Erasmus%20%2B&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/european-
education-programmes/erasmus-plus/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Compensation for overbooked, cancelled and delayed flights in the EU_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/compensation-for-overbooked-and-delayed-flights/)

Air passengers have specific consumer rights. Find out what happens if you are
denied access to an overbooked scheduled flight or your flight is cancelled or
delayed.

716.4411

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

701.44604

  * [ _Sport activities for older people_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/go-for-life/)

The Go for Life programme, is Ireland's national programme aimed at increasing
the level of participation by older people in sport and physical activity.

692.11566

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

673.84576

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

