**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to primary school ](/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/) > Choosing a primary school

#  Choosing a primary school

  * Primary school in Ireland 
  * National primary schools 
  * Private primary schools 
  * Finding a school 
  * Applying to a school 

##  Primary school in Ireland

Children usually start primary school when they are 5 years of age. They start
in September, which is the beginning of the school year.

However, you can start your child at primary school from the age of 4.

You can also choose to [ teach your child at home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/home-education/) (homeschooling).

No matter how you choose to educate your child, you must ensure they get a [
certain minimum education from the age of 6 to the age of 16
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-attendance/) .

###  **Types of primary school**

There are 2 types of primary school in Ireland:

  1. National primary schools (often called ‘national schools’) are funded by the State and do not charge fees 
  2. Private primary schools, which charge fees. 

Most children in Ireland go to a State-funded national primary school.

##  National primary schools

Many national primary schools are owned and supported by different churches.

National schools are funded by the State, so you don’t pay a fee.

They often use the initial letters below, along with the school’s name, to
describe themselves as a national school:

  * NS: National School 
  * GNS: Girls' National School 
  * BNS: Boys' National School 
  * SN: Scoil Naisiúnta 

Some schools use the Irish form of their name, such as ‘Scoil Bhríde NS’.
However, a school with an Irish name does not mean they teach through Irish.

###  **Gaelscoileanna**

[ Gaelscoileanna ](http://www.gaelscoileanna.ie/) are schools that teach
through Irish. Gaelscoileanna are State-funded. They often have the word
_Gaelscoil_ in their title.

###  **Special schools**

Most children with special educational needs attend their local primary school
in a mainstream class with other children, and with additional support. They
may also attend a special class within a mainstream school.

[ There are also several special schools
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/special-education/) , including:

  * Residential care units and schools for children with disabilities 
  * Schools for children at risk and children with specific learning disabilities 

###  **Detention of children**

Children who are sentenced to a period of detention are sent to the [
Oberstown Children Detention Campus
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-and-young-
offenders/detention-of-children/) .

###  **Multi-denominational and inter-denominational schools**

Many schools in Ireland are denominational (religious), focusing on one faith,
such as Roman Catholic or Protestant.

However, the Department of Education also [ supports multi-denominational and
inter-denominational schools (pdf) ](https://cns.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2022/11/FAQs-for-Parents.pdf) . These schools are funded by
the State and do not charge fees.

The difference between these schools is that:

  * **Multi-denominational schools** teach children about different religious views and belief systems equally 
  * **Inter-denominational schools** have a combined Catholic and Protestant ethos 

Multi-denominational and inter-denominational schools follow the national [
Primary School Curriculum ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/027ad-
primary-curriculum-framework/) . Children still learn the Irish language in
these schools.

####  **Community National Schools (CNS)**

[ Community National Schools (CNS) ](https://cns.ie/) are multi-denominational
schools that are managed by the Education and Training Boards (ETBs).

Children attending Community National Schools learn about different faiths and
belief systems (including atheist and humanist perspectives). They use a
multi-beliefs and values based curriculum called [ ‘Goodness Me, Goodness
You!’ ](https://cns.ie/goodness-me-goodness-you-
new/#1598973826411-6587794f-55d2)

####  **Educate Together schools**

[ Educate Together schools ](https://www.educatetogether.ie/) are multi-
denominational schools.

Educate Together is a [ school patron ](https://www.educatetogether.ie/school-
boards/patronage/) , which means it sets up schools and manages them. It
approves the Board of Management and appoints the principal, teachers and
SNAs. There are [ primary ](https://www.educatetogether.ie/schools/primary/)
and [ post-primary ](https://www.educatetogether.ie/schools/second-level/)
Educate Together schools.

Children attending Educate Together schools learn about different faiths and
belief systems equally (including atheist, agnostic, and humanist
perspectives). These schools use an ethical education curriculum called [
‘Learn Together’ ](https://www.educatetogether.ie/about/ethical-
education/primary/) .

####  **An Foras Pátrúnachta**

[ An Foras Pátrúnachta ](https://www.foras.ie/en/) schools teach and conduct
all internal communication through Irish. The ethos of these schools can be:

  * Catholic 
  * Multi-denominational 
  * Inter-denominational 
  * Intra-denominational (focusing on one religion). 

There are [ primary and post-primary ](https://www.foras.ie/en/find-a-school/)
An Foras Pátrúnachta schools.

##  Private primary schools

Private primary schools have the freedom to choose the curriculum, school day,
school year.

In practice, many private primary schools provide the same basic curriculum
set out for national schools, but they do not have to follow it.

##  Finding a school

To find a school, you can search primary schools by type and area using the
Department of Education’s [ Find a School ](https://www.education.ie/en/Find-
a-School/) tool.

You can filter your search results by ethos, language of instruction, and
gender. You will see a map showing schools that meet your selection.

Most schools have a website with information about their ethos, policies,
curriculum, and extra-curricular activities on offer. You can also contact a
school directly for more information.

##  Applying to a school

You should apply to the school in writing. If they don’t have an application
form, you can apply by letter or email.

All primary schools must publish an admissions notice and an admissions
policy.

The **admissions notice** tells you:

  * When the school will start accepting applications for the year (when to apply) 
  * When you will get the decision on your application 
  * When you must accept a place 

The **admissions policy** describes the rules the school will follow for
selecting students and how they make their decisions. It also states what
happens if the school is over-subscribed.

###  Discrimination

Schools cannot discriminate if your child:

  * Has a disability 
  * Is of a different race 
  * Is a member of the Traveller community. 

They also cannot discriminate because of a child’s:

  * Family status 
  * Sexual orientation 
  * Marital status 
  * Gender 
  * Religion. 

However, in some circumstances, a school can prioritise a student of a
minority religion if the family wants a school providing religious instruction
similar to that religion or belief.

You can read more about [ admissions policies in schools ](/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/)
.

_**Page edited:** 15 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/choosing-a-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Choosing%20a%20primary%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/choosing-a-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/choosing-a-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Choosing%20a%20primary%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/choosing-a-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Choosing a post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-school/)

There are different types of post-primary school. The main difference is in
how your school is managed, how it is funded and who owns your school.

1831.6317

  * [ _Admissions policies in primary and secondary schools_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/)

Explains the rules about admissions policies in schools in Ireland and changes
under the Education (Admission to Schools) Act 2018.

1707.3853

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1640.2599

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

