**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Teachers and schools ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/teachers-and-schools/) > Inspection of schools

#  Inspection of schools

  * What is a school inspection? 
  * What types of school inspection are there? 
  * Inspection reports 
  * Further information 

##  What is a school inspection?

All State primary and post-primary schools in Ireland are inspected by the
Department of Education on a regular basis. An inspection is carried out to
ensure that educational standards in schools are maintained.

The Department has a special division called the Inspectorate that carries out
school inspections. The [ Education Act (1998)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0051/index.html) sets out the
responsibilities of the Inspectorate.

The Inspectorate

  * Evaluates and reports on the quality of education provision 
  * Inspects and evaluates education provision at primary and post-primary school 
  * Advises those working in the education system 
  * Contributes to the development of education policy 

The Inspectorate also evaluates the educational services for students with
special educational needs. This is separate to the role of the [ National
Council for Special Education ](http://www.ncse.ie/) (NCSE) which helps
improve co-ordination between education and health to provide special
education.

The [ Child and Family Agency ](https://www.tusla.ie/) is responsible for
assessing [ education provision for children who are not attending school
](https://www.tusla.ie/tess/information-for-schools/) .  

##  What types of school inspection are there?

The Inspectorate carries out inspections in schools and centres for education
and reports on these school inspections.

The inspections can include:

  * Curriculum evaluations 
  * Whole School Evaluation 
  * Child protection and safeguarding 
  * Follow-through inspections look at how the school has implemented inspection recommendations 

**Whole School Evaluations (WSE)**

Whole School Evaluations (WSE) are carried out in both primary and post-
primary schools. A WSE assesses the quality of school management, teaching and
learning at a school and assesses the school’s planning and self-review. The
inspectorate may hold pre-evaluation meetings with staff and management, meet
with the parents’ association and make school and classroom visits.

The inspectorate prepares a draft report and holds meetings with staff and
management before finalising and issuing the Whole School Evaluation.

##  Inspection reports

You can find [ inspection reports for individual schools
](https://www.gov.ie/en/school-
reports/?school_roll_number=&report_title=&school_level=Post+Primary&school_level=Primary&school_level=Special+Education&report_date_from_day=&report_date_from_month=&report_date_from_year=&report_date_to_day=&report_date_to_month=&report_date_to_year=)
and [ Whole School Evaluations
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b9e7d3-inspection-reports/#inspections-in-
primary-and-post-primary-schools) on the Department of Education’s website.

##  Further information

###  Department of Education

Inspectorate Secretariat  
Department of Education  
Marlborough Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 RC96  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 889 6553

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-
information/818fa1-inspectorate/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-
information/818fa1-inspectorate/)

**Email:** [ inspectorate@education.gov.ie
](mailto:inspectorate@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 1 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/schools-
inspectorate/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Inspection%20of%20schools&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/schools-
inspectorate/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/schools-
inspectorate/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Inspection%20of%20schools&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/schools-
inspectorate/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Ownership of primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-schools/)

Who owns primary schools and how they are they funded?

1210.9918

  * [ _Special needs education in primary schools_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-schools/)

The arrangements for special needs education in primary schools include
learning support and resource teachers, and special needs assistants.

1088.9731

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1087.5515

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

