**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [ Types
of employment ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/) > Domestic workers'
employment rights

#  Domestic workers' employment rights

  * What is a domestic worker? 
  * Your employment rights as a domestic worker 
  * Your wages and tax obligations 
  * An employer’s tax and PRSI obligations 
  * Discrimination at the interview and selection stage 
  * Further information 

##  What is a domestic worker?

A _domestic worker_ is someone who is employed to carry out duties in a
private home, such as cleaning, cooking, childminding, driving and gardening.
Other duties can include the care of older people or people with disabilities.
Care assistants and [ home helps ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-
for-older-people/home-support-service/) are types of domestic workers.

Domestic workers can work part-time or full-time. Generally, they are hired
directly by the homeowners. Some domestic workers also live with their
employer, for example, _au pairs_ .

People working in other people’s home have broadly the same employment rights
as other workers, including the right to a contract, minimum wage, holidays,
and a payslip. This page explains the rights of domestic workers, including
tax obligations.

###  Am I a domestic worker?

If the homeowner is your employer, and if they deduct tax from your wages and
pay PRSI on your behalf, then you are employed as a domestic worker.

If you only work occasionally in someone’s home as a cleaner or carer, you may
not be employed as a domestic worker. Instead, you may be either:

  * Self-employed  (in this case, you are responsible for paying your own taxes and are not covered by employment rights legislation) 
  * Employed by an agency (in this case, you are an [ agency worker ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/agency-workers/) ) 

##  Your employment rights as a domestic worker

The [ Code of Practice for Protecting Persons Employed in Other People's Homes
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/cop10/)
states that domestic workers have the same employment rights and protections
as any other employee under Irish law. The employer must tell you your rights.
The only exception is a domestic worker’s right to access employment – read
‘discrimination at the interview and selection stage’ below.

###  Contract of employment

Domestic workers have a right to a written [ contract of employment
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/contract-of-employment/) , which states the terms and conditions of
their employment. The contract must include the full names of the employer and
the employee, the job title or nature of the work, the pay, and hours of work.
Your employer cannot change these conditions without your agreement.

###  Hours of work

The [ maximum hours of work ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/hours-of-work/working-hours/) that you can work in a week is 48
hours on average. The employer must keep a record of how many hours you work.

You have a right to 11 consecutive hours rest (11 hours in a row) in any
24-hour period, as well as 24 consecutive hours rest every week.

You also have a right to a 15-minute break after 4 ½ hours of work and a
30-minute break after 6 hours of work.

###  Sick pay

You have a statutory (legal) right to 5 days [ sick pay
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-
leave-and-sick-pay/) . Your contract of employment should state the procedure
you should follow if you are [ unable to work due to illness
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-
leave-and-sick-pay/) .

###  Annual leave and public holidays

If you are working full-time, you have the right to at least [ 4 weeks’ paid
leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/annual-leave/) a year (this is the legal minimum). You also have the
right to take 2 unbroken weeks’ holiday and to ask for payment for the time
off in advance.

Domestic workers have the right to be paid for the [ 10 public holidays
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-
holidays/) , or to have another paid day off instead, or an extra day’s pay.

If you travel with your employer on holiday, this is considered to be work and
you are entitled to full pay for this time.

###  Employment records

Employers must keep certain records relating to their employees. This is to
show that they are compliant with employment legislation. The employer must
keep these records for 3 years.

You can find a list of documents employers must keep in the [ employment
rights of domestic workers in Ireland (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/Domestic-Workers-in-
Ireland.pdf) . Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) inspectors will need
access to these records during an inspection. Read the WRC’s [ guide to how
inspections are carried out (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/WRC_Guide_to_Inspections_.pdf)
.

###  Dismissal and notice

Domestic workers are entitled to a [ minimum amount of notice if their
employment ends ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/losing-your-
job/losing-job-entitlements/) .

You are also protected against [ unfair dismissal
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) once
you have been working for your employer for **over a year** . You are only
protected against unfair dismissal when you have worked for **less than a
year** if the dismissal relates to specific activity, such as trade union
membership, pregnancy or entitlement to the minimum wage.

###  Dignity and privacy

The [ Code of Practice for Protecting Persons Employed in Other People's Homes
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/cop10/)
states that the employer should respect the dignity and privacy of the
employee. If you are required to live in your employer’s home, the employer
should give you a private secure room with a bed. If you must share a room,
this should only be with your agreement.

Employers should make it easy for you to carry out your personal pastimes and
interests outside of working time.

Under the code, your employer should not withhold any of your personal
documents, such as your passport or visa. Similarly, the employer should not
prevent you from joining a trade union.

##  Your wages and tax obligations

Domestic workers are also entitled to a [ minimum wage
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/) and a [ pay slip ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-
and-employment/pay-slip/) . If you work on Sundays, you are entitled to extra
pay or paid time off work.

Domestic workers should pay tax, PRSI and the Universal Social Charge (USC) in
the same way as other employees. The employer is responsible for deducting tax
from your wages. The employer must also pay the employer’s PRSI contribution
on your behalf – see ' _Paying tax, USC and PRSI for a domestic worker_ '
below.

###  Deductions from wages

If you get _board and lodgings_ (food and accommodation) as part of your
employment, the employer can deduct this from your wages. However the
deduction must be fair and reasonable, and it must be stated in your contract
of employment. You must be given written notice of the deduction.

The following amounts are included in the minimum wage calculation:

  * **For board (food) only:** €1.14 per hour worked (calculation at hourly rate) 
  * **For lodgings (accommodation) only:** €30 a week or €4.28 a day 

Deductions for other reasons, such as breakages or loss to the employer, must
meet similar criteria. For example, your contract must state that these
deductions can be made. The deduction must be fair, and the employer must give
you written notice of the deduction.

##  An employer’s tax and PRSI obligations

Domestic workers should pay tax, USC and PRSI in the same way as other
employees. If you, the employer, are employing someone to do domestic work
such as housekeeping, care of children or older people, and you are paying
them €40 a week or more, you must [ register as an employer
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/becoming-an-employer-and-ongoing-
obligations/registration-of-employers-for-paye-purposes/index.aspx) with
Revenue.

As an employer, you are responsible for deducting the PAYE (tax), PRSI and USC
from your employee’s wages. You also must [ pay employer's PRSI contributions
for your employee ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) to the Social Insurance Fund. You
must give the employee a [ pay slip ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/pay-slip/) with details of the PAYE, PRSI and
USC that has been deducted.

You can read Revenue's [ Employer’s Guide to PAYE (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-tax-capital-gains-
tax-corporation-tax/part-42/42-04-35a.pdf) for information on [ new employees
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/index.aspx) , calculating tax
due, and PRSI. For further assistance, call the National Employer helpline
Tel: 01 738 3638.  

##  Discrimination at the interview and selection stage

People working in other people’s home have broadly the same employment rights
as other workers. However, ‘access to employment’ is the only area where the
rights of domestic workers differ from those of other workers.

While it is usually illegal to discriminate against prospective employees when
hiring them (for example, at the interview and selection stage), there is an
exception when the job is to be carried out in someone’s home. In this case,
it is not illegal to discriminate against a prospective domestic employee at
the interview and selection stage.

For example, an employer could state that they are looking for a woman to look
after children without being considered ‘discriminatory’. However, once the
employee has taken up the job, they are fully protected by [ employment
equality legislation ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/equality-in-the-
workplace/) .  

##  Further information

The Irish Government ratified (formally accepted) the [ International Labour
Organisation (ILO) Convention 2011, on Decent Work for Domestic Workers
](https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_INSTRUMENT_ID:2551460)
.

Read a leaflet about the [ employment rights of domestic workers (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/Domestic-Workers-in-
Ireland.pdf) , which was published by the Workplace Relations Commission
(WRC).

You can also [ contact the Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU)
](https://www.ictu.ie/contact) , which campaigns to inform domestic workers of
their rights.

###  Information for migrant workers

Many domestic workers in Ireland are migrant workers, In general, non-EEA
citizens cannot get [ employment permits ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/overview-employment-permits/) for any work in
private homes – see the I [ neligible List of Occupations for Employment
Permits. ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/what-we-do/workplace-and-
skills/employment-permits/employment-permit-eligibility/ineligible-categories-
of-employment/)

The [ Migrant Rights Centre Ireland ](http://www.mrci.ie/) provides support to
migrant workers.

The Workplace Relations Commission has published leaflets about domestic work
in different languages. You can [ download the leaflet in Hindi (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/hindi-
domestic-worker-leaflet.pdf) , or [ in Mandarin (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/mandarin-
domestic-worker-leaflet.pdf) , or [ in Portugese (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/portugese-
domestic-worker-leaflet.pdf) , or [ in Russian (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/russian-
domestic-worker-leaflet.pdf) , or [ in Spanish (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/spanish-
domestic-worker-leaflet.pdf) , or [ in French (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/french-
domestic-worker-leaflet.pdf) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

###  Irish Congress of Trade Unions

31-32 Parnell Square  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 8897777

**Fax:** (01) 8872012

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ictu.ie/ ](http://www.ictu.ie/)

**Email:** [ congress@ictu.ie ](mailto:congress@ictu.ie)

###  Migrant Rights Centre Ireland

13 Lower Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland  
D01 Y893

**Tel:** (01) 889 7570

**Homepage:** [ https://www.mrci.ie/ ](https://www.mrci.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@mrci.ie ](mailto:info@mrci.ie)

_**Page edited:** 5 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/domestic-workers-employment-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Domestic%20workers%27%20employment%20rights&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/domestic-workers-employment-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/domestic-workers-employment-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Domestic%20workers%27%20employment%20rights&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/domestic-workers-employment-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rights of young workers_ ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/young-people-at-work/rights-of-young-workers/)

There are important rules that govern the employment of children and young
people.

1663.9749

  * [ _Rights of fixed-term workers_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/rights-of-fixed-term-workers/)

Employees on fixed-term contracts generally have the same employment rights as
employees on open-ended contracts.

1627.532

  * [ _Rights of part-time workers_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/rights-of-part-time-workers/)

Find out about part-time workers' rights under the Protection of Employees
(Part-Time Work) Act 2001.

1516.4633

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

