**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Farming and managing land ](/en/environment/land/) > Organic Farming Scheme

#  Organic Farming Scheme

  * What is the Organic Farming Scheme? 
  * What do I need to do for the Organic Farming Scheme? 
  * Do I qualify for the Organic Farming Scheme? 
  * How much do I get for the Organic Farming Scheme? 
  * How do I apply for the Organic Farming Scheme? 
  * Useful contacts for the Organic Farming Scheme 

##  What is the Organic Farming Scheme?

**The Organic Farming Scheme is currently closed to new applicants.**

The Organic Farming Scheme (OFS) provides financial support to farmers to
encourage them to produce organic food.

Organic food is food produced using [ organic farming practices
](https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/farming/organic-farming/organic-production-
and-products_en) , such as:

  * Not using synthetic fertilisers and pesticides 
  * Not using genetically modified organisms 
  * Following the highest standards of animal welfare 

The scheme also aims to reduce the environmental impact of farming and improve
animal welfare.

The scheme started in 2024 and runs for 5 years. It is available to farmers
who farm organic livestock or crops.

The amount you get is based on the amount of land you farm organically and
what you produce.

##  What do I need to do for the Organic Farming Scheme?

**1\. Research organic farming**

You should research the type of organic farming you hope to do and find out if
it is suitable for you and your farm. If you will be organic farming for the
first time, it might mean significant changes to the way you currently farm.

Gov.ie has useful information about [ organic farming
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fc7c8-organic-farming/) , including how to
convert to organic production methods.

If you are not already certified as organic, the first 2 years of the scheme
count as a conversion period and you get higher payments during this time.

**2\. Register with an Organic Certification Body**

You should register with an [ Organic Certification Body (OCB)
](https://www.teagasc.ie/rural-economy/organics/steps-to-organic-
conversion/organic-certification-bodies/) . This involves:

  * Applying to an OCB 
  * Completing a conversion plan 
  * Having an inspection 

Once you are certified as organic, you will have yearly inspections from the
OCB.

There are 2 organic certification bodies in Ireland:

  * [ Irish Organic Association ](https://www.irishorganicassociation.ie/)
  * [ Organic Trust ](https://organictrust.ie/)

**3\. Complete an approved training course**

You will have to complete an approved training course. This is a 25-hour, QQI
Level 5 course on organic farming principles. This course is available from
the [ National Organic Training (NOTS) ](https://nots.ie/) or [ Teagasc
](https://teagasc.clr.events/event/135453:teagasc-organic-courses-zoom-april-
may-2024) .

You can apply for the scheme before you complete the approved course. But, you
will have to upload your completion certificate on the online OFS application
system by 1 October 2024. Otherwise, you will not qualify for payment.

If you apply as part of a joint application of a Farm Partnership, only one
person needs to complete the course.

**4\. Apply for the Organic Farming Scheme**

You apply to the Organic Farming Scheme with your [ Basic Income Support for
Sustainability Scheme (BISS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-
for-sustainability-scheme-for-farmers/) application.

You can access this on agfood.ie.

See ‘ [ How do I apply for the Organic Farming Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/organic-farming-
scheme/#4b277e) ’ below.

**5\. Become organic**

Once you have been accepted onto the scheme, you can only buy organic or in-
conversion stock for land which you are farming organically.

If you already own animals, these cannot become organic. However, once you
have progressed through the in-conversion phase, the offspring of these
animals will be organic.

Your farm will only reach organic status after the 2-year conversion period.
This period can be extended if you do not comply with organic standards. This
is monitored by the OCB. After the conversion period, you can advertise and
sell products as organic.

You can find organic livestock, seeds, fodder and other organic produce on the
[ Organic Trading Hub ](https://organictradinghub.ie/) .

###  **Converting part of your farm for organic farming**

You don’t have to convert your entire farm to organic farming. You can convert
part of it so long as you:

  * Use different species or varieties of crops to make sure that organic and non-organic crops can be told apart 
  * Use different species of livestock to make sure that organic and non-organic livestock can be told apart 

##  Do I qualify for the Organic Farming Scheme?

To qualify for the Organic Farming Scheme, you must:

  * Produce livestock or crops that meet [ EU organic standards ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32018R0848&qid=1675350493035)
  * Be an [ active farmer ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/266405/318c630d-b5f7-48a6-bcf9-4f5332d6863a.pdf#%5B%7B%22num%22%3A142%2C%22gen%22%3A0%7D%2C%7B%22name%22%3A%22XYZ%22%7D%2C69%2C720%2C0%5D)
  * Be 18 or older 
  * Register with an Organic Certification Body and be approved as an organic operator 
  * Complete an approved training course. If you have already completed an approved course for another scheme, this will be accepted. Your course certificate should be uploaded as part of your online application. 

Your farm must be farmed and managed by you for the length of the scheme. You
must also have at least 3 hectares that you can farm organically, or 1 hectare
if you are a horticultural producer. At least 50% of the horticultural hectare
must contain crops each year.

If you farm less than 1 hectare of horticulture, your application may be
considered if you can prove that you are managing a commercial enterprise.

**What land doesn’t qualify for the scheme?**

Some land does not qualify for the Organic Farm Scheme including:

  * Conventional (non-organic) land 
  * Commonage (this is land which is owned by a group of people or by one person over which other persons have rights) 
  * Grazing rights 
  * Rented land 
  * Forestry (However, there are some exceptions to this, see Section 13 of [ OFC 2024 Terms and Conditions (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/215256/5e64048b-d449-4d92-9731-0f5db929c3a4.pdf#page=null) . 
  * Farmyards 
  * Farm roadways 
  * Other non-organic productive land 

##  How much do I get for the Organic Farming Scheme?

There are different payment rates depending on:

  * The type of farming you do 
  * The amount of land you farm organically 
  * How long you are in the scheme 

The amount you get is shown in the table below.

**Type of farming** |  **Year 1-2 (converting to organics)** |  **Year 3-5 (fully converted to organics)**  
---|---|---  
**1-70 hectares** **(per hectare)** |  **Over 70 hectares** **(per hectare)** |  **1-70 hectares** **(per hectare)** |  **Over 70 hectares** **(per hectare)**  
**Horticulture** |  €800  |  €60  |  €600  |  €30   
**Tillage** |  €320  |  €60  |  €270  |  €30   
**Dairy** |  €350  |  €60  |  €300  |  €30   
**Drystock** |  €300  |  €60  |  €250  |  €30   
  
###  **Participation payment**

You get a participation payment to cover administrative costs as well as your
per hectare payments. This is:

  * €2,000 for your first year of converting to organics 
  * €1,400 for each subsequent year of the contract 

This payment is included in your annual OFS payment.

###  **Can I add or remove land from my OFS contract?**

Yes, you can add or remove land from your OFS contract after your contact has
started. So, if you buy land during the contract, you can add it to the scheme
and get paid for it.

You can add land that is already fully converted to organics in any year of
your contract. However, you can only add land that still has to be converted
to organics during the first 4 years of the OFS contract.

You must add the land to your organic licence before 1 January of the year you
want to include it. You must also declare it on your BISS application. You
will not be paid for part of a year.

If you are reducing the land you have in the OFS scheme, your annual payment
will be reduced to reflect this. In general, if you have already been paid for
an area that is being removed, you will have to pay this back with interest.

This will not apply in certain circumstances, for example, if you retire from
farming and have completed 3 years on the scheme.

###  **How do I get my payments?**

To get your OFS payments, you must make a payment claim before the BISS
deadline each year. This is done through your BISS application online at
agfood.ie. You will only be paid for the land you have registered on your BISS
application as ‘organic’ or ‘in-conversion’.

To qualify for the in-conversion rate of payment for the maximum 2 years, you
must apply for the scheme within 4 months of getting your organic licence.

###  **What happens if I do not follow the rules of the scheme?**

If you do not comply with the terms and conditions of the scheme, you can be
penalised:

  * You can be removed from the scheme 
  * You can be banned from the scheme for up to 5 years 
  * You may have to return the money you got including any interest. These refunds can be deducted from your future payments for this scheme or other EU financed schemes. 

###  **Appealing a decision**

If you are penalised for not complying with the rules of the scheme, you can
appeal this decision.

You can do this by writing to the Department of Agriculture, Food and the
Marine outlining the reasons why the penalty should not be applied.

You must do this within 10 working days of getting the formal notification
about the penalty. You will get the decision about your appeal in writing.

The Agriculture Appeals Office have [ more information on this process (pdf)
](https://www.agriappeals.gov.ie/media/agriappeals/content/publications/appealsprocedures/Appeal%20Procedure%20Summary%20141223.pdf)
.

##  How do I apply for the Organic Farming Scheme?

**The Organic Farming Scheme is currently closed to new applicants.**

When applications are open, you apply to the Organic Farming Scheme through
your [ Basic Income Support for Sustainability Scheme (BISS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-
for-sustainability-scheme-for-farmers/) application, which can be accessed on
agfood.ie.

In your BISS application, you declare the land parcels that will be part of
the OFS as either ‘in-conversion’ or ‘organic’.

Gov.ie have a useful [ step-by-step guide (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/124866/45fbc252-1861-458b-81a7-af97db9b6777.pdf#page=null)
to help you complete your application.

You can also get a Farm Advisory System (FAS) approved advisor to apply for
OFS and other farming grants for you. A FAS advisor is someone who is
qualified to give farmers advice on a range of topics, including applying for
grants and schemes. You will have to pay the FAS advisor for this service. You
can find [ a farm advisor ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b41a6-farm-
advisory-system/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/farmadvisor/#find-a-farm-advisor)
on gov.ie.

##  Useful contacts for the Organic Farming Scheme

If you have queries about the scheme, you can email organic@agriculture.gov.ie
or call 053 916 3425.

The [ Organic Trust ](https://organictrust.ie/certification) and the [ Irish
Organic Association ](https://www.irishorganicassociation.ie/certification/)
have useful information about organic certification and converting to organic
farming.

For information on farming schemes, you can contact your [ local office of the
Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine
](http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/contact/) or [ Teagasc
](http://www.teagasc.ie/) .

You can find [ a list of farm advisors
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b41a6-farm-advisory-
system/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/farmadvisor/#find-a-farm-advisor) on
gov.ie.

_**Page edited:** 1 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/organic-
farming-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Organic%20Farming%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/organic-
farming-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/organic-
farming-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Organic%20Farming%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/organic-
farming-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Farming grants and schemes_ ](/en/environment/land/farming-grants-and-schemes/)

An overview of the main grants and schemes available to farmers.

1847.2458

  * [ _Farming education, grants and supports_ ](/en/environment/land/farming-education-grants-and-supports/)

There are a number of farming courses and farm apprenticeships, if you want to
become a farmer or upskill in a specific area of farming. There are also
grants to help cover some of the costs of these courses.

1502.21

  * [ _Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)

Overview of the employment schemes and other supports which encourage people
getting unemployment and certain other social welfare payments to take up
employment.

1187.1398

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

