**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment and disability ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/) > Work
and Access - In-Work Support Grant

#  Work and Access - In-Work Support Grant

  * What is Work and Access? 
  * What is the In-Work Support Grant? 
  * Who can apply? 
  * Supports available 
  * Finding a specialist or training 
  * How much is the grant? 
  * How to apply 
  * More information 

##  What is Work and Access?

[ Work and Access
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/) is a scheme to support inclusive
employment by offering funding to adjust workplaces and make them more
accessible for people with disabilities.

Funding is available to qualifying job candidates, employees, self-employed
people, and employers.

There are 7 categories of Work and Access support:

  * [ Workplace Needs Assessment ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-grant/)
  * [ Communication Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-communication-support-grant/)
  * In-Work Support 
  * [ Personal Reader ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/personal-reader-grant/)
  * [ Work Equipment ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-grant/)
  * [ Workplace Adaptation ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)
  * [ Disability Equality and Inclusion Training ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/disability-equality-and-inclusion-training-grant/)   

This page explains the In-Work Support Grant. Depending on your needs, you may
be entitled to more than one support at the same time. Check the [ Work and
Access Programme ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-
programme/) details in full before you apply for any support.

##  What is the In-Work Support Grant?

The In-Work Support Grant provides funding towards specialist support if you
have a disability or health condition and need help to do your job or re-train
if you move to another role.

##  Who can apply?

New or existing employees or self-employed people can apply for funding. You
can make the application yourself or someone else can apply on your behalf.

A workplace needs assessment must be carried out before you can get in-work
support to show that you need this support.

##  Supports available

You can apply for funding towards a work coach, a lámh support worker,
specialist or other communication support worker such as a sign language
interpreter or lip reader.

###  **What is a work coach?**

A work coach offers specialised employment support to help you stay in your
job and provides support to your employer.

###  **What is a lámh support worker?**

A lámh support worker works with a lámh user.

Lámh is a manual sign system used by people with intellectual disability and
communication needs.

##  Finding a specialist or training

###  **Finding a specialist**

To receive support, the specialist support worker or work coach must be
qualified or experienced (or both), and have a track record in occupational
evaluation or workplace assessment.

Suitably qualified specialists include:

  * Occupational therapist 
  * Occupational psychologist 
  * Occupational physician 
  * Occupational health nurse 
  * Ergonomic specialist 
  * Chartered physiotherapist who may provide once-off or occasional consultations 

Lámh support workers must be qualified or experienced (or both).

There is no pre-approved list of specialist providers. Specialists should be
registered with a relevant professional body such as [ the Register of Health
and Social Care Professionals (CORU) ](https://www.coru.ie/) or [ the
Association of Occupational Therapists. ](https://www.aoti.ie/)

Specialists who work for the employer or companies connected to the employer
are not eligible for funding.

###  **Finding training**

The grants can cover training services if identified under a Workplace Needs
Assessment. The Department of Social Protection (DSP) will pay the training
costs directly to the service provider.

The training must not be available through the DSP directly or any other state
provider (for example Solas or ETBs, Teagasc).

##  How much is the grant?

You can get up to €12,500 a year for hiring a work coach, specialist support,
or lámh support worker.

You can also get up to 30 hours of communication support for contact hours
with the specialist if needed.

##  How to apply

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) is developing an online application
process, which will be available soon.

To apply for any of the supports available through the Work and Access
Programme, follow these steps:

####  **Step 1: Complete the application form**

  * Request the form from your local Intreo Office or download it from gov.ie. 
  * If you are unsure about the support needed, you only complete the relevant section on the [ WA1 Form ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/297281/a9af4dab-6229-4c76-87a2-4bb3dfbfef2d.pdf#page=null) . 
  * Provide quotes to support your application (see Quotes in Appendix 6 of the Operational Guidelines). 

####  **Step 2: Eligibility check**

  * Send your completed WA1 Form by post to Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 
  * Your eligibility will be checked by the Work and Access Section 

####  **Step 3: Assessment and approval**

  * An officer will contact you directly to discuss your application. 
  * If eligible, you will be told about the next steps and any additional sections of the application form to complete. 
  * Approval for eligibility does not guarantee funding. 
  * Final approval will be made after you meet specific requirements set by Department officers. 

###  **Appeals**

Work and Access is an administrative scheme, so you have no right to appeal a
particular decision on your application.

If you are unhappy with the decision, you can ask to have your case reviewed
by another DSP officer who was not involved in the original decision.

Write to the Department of Social Protection within 21 days of the decision,
explaining why you think the decision is wrong and provide any proof you have
to support your argument.

##  More information

For more information about the Work and Access programme:

  * Read the Department of Social Protection [ Operational Guidelines for the Work and Access Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/429d6-operational-guidelines-work-and-access/)
  * Visit your local Intreo Centre 
  * Email: WorkandAccess@welfare.ie 
  * Write to: Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20In-
Work%20Support%20Grant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20In-
Work%20Support%20Grant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Work and Access - Communication Support Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-communication-support-grant/)

The Communication Support Grant is part of the new Work and Access employment
programme, designed to help people with disabilities to find or keep a job by
removing or reducing workplace barriers.

2972.482

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Adaptation Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)

The Workplace Adaptation Grant is is part of the new Work and Access
employment programme, designed to help people with disabilities find or keep a
job by removing or reducing workplace barriers.

2794.8987

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Equipment Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-grant/)

The Workplace Equipment Grant is part of the new Work and Access employment
programme, designed to help people with disabilities find or keep a job by
removing or reducing workplace barriers.

2746.2402

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

