**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Data protection at work ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/) > Garda vetting

#  Garda vetting

  * What is Garda vetting? 
  * Garda vetting for hosting Ukrainian refugees 
  * Who handles Garda vetting? 
  * Who needs Garda vetting? 
  * Information in your vetting disclosure 
  * How to apply for Garda vetting 
  * How long does Garda vetting last? 
  * Requesting personal data 
  * Contact information 

##  What is Garda vetting?

If you are working or volunteering with children or vulnerable adults in
Ireland, you must go through _Garda vetting_ . This process checks if you have
a criminal record, or any history that might pose a threat to vulnerable
people.

The Garda Siochána National Vetting Bureau handles the process and sends a
_vetting disclosure_ to the organisation you are involved with.

Currently, you won’t need to be re-vetted unless you change jobs or roles
within a sports or community group.

The rules for Garda vetting are set out in the [ National Vetting Bureau
(Children and Vulnerable Persons) Acts 2012-2016
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/en_act_2012_0047.htm)
.

You can read [ frequently asked questions about Garda vetting
](https://vetting.garda.ie/Help/FAQ) on the National Vetting Bureau website.

###  Changes to Garda vetting process

The Government is currently reviewing the Garda vetting system to strengthen
the process around re-vetting requirements. We will update this page as more
information becomes available.

###  Police Certificate

Garda vetting is different to getting a [ Police Certificate ](/en/moving-
country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/police-certificate/) . Police
Certificates are issued by the Gardaí for various reasons, such as starting a
business abroad or applying for a visa in another country.

##  Garda vetting for hosting Ukrainian refugees

Special procedures have been set up by the Department of Children, Equality,
Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY), the Garda National Vetting Bureau
(GNVB) and the Irish Red Cross for vetting host families accommodating
Ukrainian refugees.

Garda vetting applies to host families, including hosts and family members
over 16 who are sharing their homes with Ukrainian families, especially those
with children or vulnerable people.

##  Who handles Garda vetting?

The National Vetting Bureau, part of the Garda Síochána, handles requests from
employers needing information on _prospective_ (soon-to-be) employees,
volunteers, and other workers.

Vetting is only carried out for organisations registered with the Bureau. [
Relevant organisations
](https://vetting.garda.ie/RegisteredOrganisation/Relevant) include those
working with children and vulnerable adults or providing services involving
access to them.

Read more details about the [ vetting procedure
](https://vetting.garda.ie/VettingProcedure/HowIsVettingConducted) on the
Garda vetting website.

###  Other types of vetting

Besides standard vetting, the National Vetting Bureau also manages vetting
related to Non-Act applications required by other legislation.

For example, certain bodies, such as An Garda Síochána, the Courts Service and
some government departments require applicants to disclose any spent
convictions.

##  Who needs Garda vetting?

If your role at a relevant organization involves working with children or
vulnerable adults, you must undergo Garda vetting.

This includes staff, contractors, [ agency workers ](/en/employment/types-of-
employment/agency-workers/) , volunteers, students or [ apprentices
](/en/education/further-education-and-training/apprenticeships/) in:

  * Childcare services 
  * Schools 
  * Hospitals and health services 
  * Residential services or accommodation for children or vulnerable people 
  * Treatment, therapy or counselling services for children or vulnerable people 
  * Services providing leisure, sporting, or physical activities to children or vulnerable people 
  * Services promoting religious beliefs 

###  Self-employed people

Garda vetting is not done on a personal basis. If you are self-employed, you
can only apply for vetting through a relevant organisation, as defined in
Section 2 of the Act.

###  Private security employees

Under the [ Private Security Services Act 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2004/en/act/pub/0012/index.html) private
security employees like bouncers and nightclub security staff must be Garda
vetted.

##  Information in your vetting disclosure

When vetted by the National Vetting Bureau, your criminal record is
_disclosed_ (revealed) to the _authorised liaison person_ in the registered
organisation (the company, body, or club you want to work for).

The liaison person will get a _vetting disclosure_ about you. This disclosure
will include:

  * Details of any convictions 
  * Details of pending prosecutions 
  * A statement of [ specified information ](https://vetting.garda.ie/VettingProcedure/SpecifiedInformation) **or** a statement that there is no criminal record or specified information relating to you 

A statement of specified information is any information that leads to a
genuine belief you pose a threat to children or vulnerable people.

###  Minor offences

Certain [ minor offences
](https://vetting.garda.ie/VettingProcedure/WhatIsDisclosed) in the District
Court over 7 years old are not included in the vetting disclosure.

However, there are exceptions for offences specified in [ Schedule 3
](https://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/en_act_2012_0047.htm#SCHED3)
of the Acts and in [ Schedule 1
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2016/act/4/schedule/1/enacted/en/html#sched1)
of the Criminal Justice (Spent Convictions and Certain Disclosures) Act 2016.

Read more about [ spent convictions ](/en/justice/criminal-law/spent-
convictions/) .

###  Retention of vetting information

Organisations should delete Garda vetting disclosures a year after receiving
them, except in exceptional circumstances. The reference number and date of a
disclosure can be kept for future reference.

Read the [ guidance note (pdf)
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/sites/default/files/uploads/2021-05/Garda%20Vetting%20April%202021..pdf)
on data protection considerations on the Data Protection Commission’s website.

##  How to apply for Garda vetting

If you apply for a position requiring Garda vetting, you will be sent a Garda
vetting application form. You can [ apply online using e-Vetting
](https://vetting.garda.ie/Application/About) or you can [ use a paper form
](https://vetting.garda.ie/Application/Paper) .

If you are under 18, you must submit a consent form signed by a parent or
guardian.

###  e-Vetting process

To use [ e-Vetting ](https://vetting.garda.ie/Application/About) you must be
over 16 and have a valid email address. You must complete the “proof of
identity” process.

The steps involved are:

  1. Fill out the vetting information form sent by the registered organisation. 
  2. After validating your proof of identity, you will get an email with a link to the online vetting application form. 
  3. Complete the form online and submit it to the organisation. 
  4. The organisation reviews your form and sends it to the National Vetting Bureau. 
  5. The Bureau processes the application and sends a vetting disclosure to the organisation. 
  6. The organisation sends you a copy of the disclosure. 

You can [ track your e-Vetting application ](https://vetting.garda.ie/Track)
status and find the [ registration details for organisations
](https://vetting.garda.ie/RegisteredOrganisation/HowToApply) on the National
Vetting Bureau website.

###  Disputes and appeals

If you disagree with the details in the vetting disclosure, you can [ dispute
this ](https://vetting.garda.ie/Disputes/Disclosure) with the organisation
conducting the vetting. Provide a summary of your reasons to the liaison
person. The liaison person will send the application to the National Vetting
Bureau for re-checking.

There is an [ independent appeals process
](https://vetting.garda.ie/Disputes/Appeal) for disclosure of specified
information. You must make your appeal **within 14 days** of the decision.

###  Registering your organisation

Any organisation requiring Garda vetting **must register** with the National
Vetting Bureau. This includes appointing a liaison person to handle vetting
disclosures.

Read the [ procedure for registering an organisation
](https://vetting.garda.ie/RegisteredOrganisation/HowToApply) on the National
Vetting Bureau website.

##  How long does Garda vetting last?

Typically, you won’t have to be re-vetted unless you change jobs or roles
within a sports or community organisation.

The Government is considering introducing [ mandatory re-vetting every 3 years
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/c935f-minister-mcentee-moves-to-reform-
vetting-arrangements-and-legislation/) .

##  Requesting personal data

Garda vetting is not done for individuals on a personal basis. However, you
have the [ right to access your personal data held by the Garda Siochána
](https://www.garda.ie/en/information-centre/data-protection/) .

Read more about [ how to access your personal data ](/en/government-in-
ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/) .

A response to your data protection access request is **not** the same as Garda
vetting, a Police Certificate, a Garda Reference, or proof of no convictions.

##  Contact information

###  National Vetting Bureau

Racecourse Road  
Thurles  
Tipperary  
E41 RD60  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 504 27300

**Locall:** 0818 488 488

**Homepage:** [ http://www.garda.ie/Controller.aspx?Page=17113
](http://www.garda.ie/Controller.aspx?Page=17113)

**Email:** [ vetting@garda.ie ](mailto:vetting@garda.ie)

_**Page edited:** 27 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/garda-
vetting/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Garda%20vetting&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/garda-
vetting/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/garda-
vetting/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Garda%20vetting&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/garda-
vetting/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Questioning and surveillance by Gardaí_ ](/en/justice/arrests/questioning-and-surveillance/)

The Gardaí have the right to request information from the public, make general
enquiries and more. What is the role of the Gardaí in questioning and
surveillance of the public?

1148.647

  * [ _Garda Síochána - national police force_ ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/)

The Garda Síochána is the national police force. It has responsibility for
carrying out all policing duties in the State.

1014.44775

  * [ _National policy on children and young people_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/national-policy-on-children/)

This document gives information on national policy on children and young
people in Ireland and their participation in decision-making.

922.0647

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

