**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to post-primary school ](/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/) > School transport
for post-primary students

#  School transport for post-primary students

  * What is the school transport scheme? 
  * Who can use the School Transport Scheme? 
  * School Transport fees 
  * How to apply for the School Transport Scheme 
  * More information 

##  What is the school transport scheme?

The Department of Education provides subsidised school transport for post-
primary pupils who live more than 4.8 kilometres away from the appropriate
school.

Bus Éireann runs the school bus service and the Department of Education
decides the annual fares. The Department and Bus Éireann decide what is the
relevant school, considering:

  * Ethos 
  * Language 
  * The shortest traversable route from the child’s home. 

The service is only provided where there are at least 10 eligible pupils in an
area that can be economically serviced by a bus route. Even when a pupil meets
the age and distance criteria for school transport, there is no legal
entitlement to transport.

**Applications for school transport services 2024-2025 are now open** . **The
closing date for on-time applications is 26 April 2024.**

You can submit your application on the [ Bus Éireann
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=256) website (see ‘How to apply for
the School Transport Scheme’ below).

See details of the [ Post-Primary School Transport Scheme (pdf)
](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/38419/97bf79d78dcd476096f3b19d1613696c.pdf)
on the Department’s website.

There are some [ special transport arrangements for pupils with disabilities
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/school-transport-for-children-with-special-
needs/) .

**Pupils from Ukraine**

Pupils from Ukraine should visit [ gov.ie/ukraine
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/320e9-employment-and-education/#education)
for details on how to apply for school transport. They should not apply on the
Bus Éireann website. Applications will continue to be accepted as families are
relocated or as new families arrive.

###  **Proposed changes to school transport scheme**

A review of the school transport scheme has recommended changes to how the
scheme works, so that more students can use buses by 2030.

It recommends:

  * Removing the ‘nearest school' requirement, where there are existing bus routes or where there is enough demand for a new route (at least 10 pupils) 
  * Reducing the distance required for pupils to qualify for the school transport scheme 

Some of the recommended changes will be piloted in September 2024, and then
introduced gradually from September 2025.

You can read a [ summary report (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/285289/?page=null) and [ the full final report (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/285291/b8dea5c5-5c6b-4888-b695-39e38d7a60ea.pdf#page=null)
of the school transport review.

##  Who can use the School Transport Scheme?

To be eligible for school transport, a student must:

  * Be enrolled in a recognised post-primary school 
  * Live 4.8 kilometres or more from the nearest school. 

Bus Éireann provides a list of [ FAQs about the School Transport Scheme
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=354) .

###  Changes from 2012

The school’s _Catchment Boundary Area_ was used up to 2012-2013 to determine
the eligibility of post-primary pupils for school transport. Under this
system, pupils living more than 4.8 kilometres from the post-primary school
catering for the catchment area where they live are fully eligible for school
transport to their school. Pupils who became eligible for transport under this
arrangement continue to be eligible so long as their circumstances remain the
same, for example where they continue to reside at the same address and attend
the same school.

Since September 2012, pupils who start post-primary school will not be
assessed under the catchment area system. They must be living 4.8 km or more
from the nearest post-primary education centre, having regard to ethos and
language, in order to qualify for transport.

There are also changes for pupils with medical cards - see 'Rates' below.

###  Transport arrangements

Parents must arrange to bring their child to the nearest pick-up point on the
bus route. Generally, bus routes are organised so that no pupil has more than
3.2 kilometres to travel to a pick-up point.

There is provision for parents to pay for the bus service to be extended to a
closer point, where this is feasible from the point of view of time and where
it would not result in a major disruption to other pupils using the service.

Pupils attending a recognised post-primary school that is not the post-primary
school for their area can use the service if there is room on the bus,
provided they live at least 4.8 kilometres from the school in question.

Pupils may be given transport to enable them to attend the nearest all-Irish
post-primary school or a post-primary school for their particular ethos if
they live at least 4.8 kilometres or more from that school.

###  Concessionary transport

Children who are not eligible for school transport may be allowed to use it on
a concessionary basis and pay the full charge – there is no waiver for pupils
with medical cards.

Detailed conditions are published in the [ Post-Primary School Transport
Scheme (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/230699/d035eca6-3ba5-4193-b4ae-c37da6acd487.pdf) .

###  Remote area grants

Remote area grants are payable by the Department as a contribution towards
private transport arrangements for eligible pupils for whom no transport
service is available. These grants may also be paid for eligible pupils who
live 3.2 kilometres or more from the nearest pick-up point for school
transport.

###  Standards

Children using school transport are expected to behave responsibly and to have
regard for their own safety and the safety of others. There are [ guidelines
(pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/38516/43682ade1760443190db6e368e385bce.pdf)
covering the standards expected and how any alleged misbehaviour will be
handled.

###  Reduced fares on public transport

[ Dublin Bus ](http://www.dublinbus.ie/Fares-and-Tickets/) , the [ LUAS
](https://luas.ie/ticket-types.html) and the [ DART
](https://www.irishrail.ie/en-ie/accordion/single-return-tickets/schoolchild)
offer concessionary fares during school terms.

##  School Transport fees

The fees for school transport in 2024-2025 are:

  * €50 for a primary school child 
  * €75 for a post- primary school child 

The maximum fee for a family is €125.

The closing date for on-time applications is **26 April 2024** . The closing
date for payments is **7 June 2024** .

**If you make a late payment or submit medical card details after the deadline
date, your application is considered late** and you are not guaranteed a seat.

###  Pupils with medical cards

Pupils who are eligible for school transport (see above) and who hold a valid
medical card are entitled to free school transport to the nearest school.

If a pupil with a medical card is not attending the nearest school:

In previous years, eligible pupils using school transport to a school outside
their catchment area could have the charge waived if they held a valid medical
card. This arrangement will continue for pupils who are already availing of
the waiver.

From 2012-2013 on, a medical card holder who is starting to attend a post-
primary school further away than the nearest education centre is not entitled
to free transport to that school.

##  How to apply for the School Transport Scheme

If your child is enrolling in post-primary school for the first time, you can
apply for school transport [ online on the Bus Éireann website
](http://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=257) . You can also [ contact Bus
Éireann ](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=523) with questions about
your application or ticket.

Applications for the 2024-2025 school year are now open. The closing date for
on-time applications is **26 April 2024** . If you apply after the closing
date, it is considered a late application.

If you have queries about school transport, you can [ contact Bus Éireann
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=290#contact) or contact the [ School
Transport Section of the Department of Education
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/07a71-school-
transport/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/#contact)
(see 'More information' below).

###  Applications for the remote area grant

You should apply in writing directly to the School Transport section of the
Department of Education at the address below.

###  Appeals

If you wish to appeal a decision on your application for school transport, you
should complete the [ appeal form ](https://www.schooltransportappeals.ie/)
online. You can send any additional documents to the [ School Transport
Appeals Board ](https://www.schooltransportappeals.ie/) c/o the Department of
Education at the address below.

##  More information

You can find [ regional contact numbers for the School Transport Section of
the Department of Education ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/07a71-school-
transport/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/#contact)
on Gov.ie.

You can also find [ contact details for Bus Éireann's school transport offices
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=523) on the Bus Éireann website.

###  Department of Education

School Transport Section  
Portlaoise Road  
Tullamore  
Offaly  
Ireland

**Tel:** (057) 932 5466/7

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/)

**Email:** [ school_transport@education.gov.ie
](mailto:school_transport@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 8 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-
transport-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=School%20transport%20for%20post-
primary%20students&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-
transport-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-
transport-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=School%20transport%20for%20post-
primary%20students&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-
transport-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

2610.4124

  * [ _Primary school transport scheme_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-transport-scheme/)

The transport scheme for primary school pupils and information on how to
qualify.

2211.8103

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

2164.294

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

