**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment and disability ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/) > Work
and Access - Personal Reader Grants

#  Work and Access - Personal Reader Grants

  * What is Work and Access? 
  * What is a personal reader? 
  * What support is available? 
  * Who can get a Personal Reader Grant under Work and Access? 
  * Finding the personal reader 
  * How to apply 
  * After your application is approved 
  * More information 

##  What is Work and Access?

[ Work and Access ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/47db8-work-and-access-
supports/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/workandaccess/) is a scheme to support
inclusive employment by offering funding to adjust workplaces and make them
more accessible for people with disabilities.

Funding is available to qualifying job candidates, employees, self-employed
people, and employers.

There are 7 categories of Work and Access support:

  * [ Workplace Needs Assessment ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-grant/)
  * [ Communication Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-communication-support-grant/)
  * [ In-Work Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-grant/)
  * Personal Reader 
  * [ Work Equipment ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-grant/)
  * [ Workplace Adaptation ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)
  * [ Disability Equality and Inclusion Training ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/disability-equality-and-inclusion-training-grant/)

This page explains the Work and Access supports available for personal
readers. Depending on your needs, you may be entitled to more than one support
at the same time. Check the [ Work and Access Programme
](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-programme/) details
in full before you apply for any support.

##  What is a personal reader?

A personal reader is a person who helps a blind or visually impaired employee
with work-related reading.

Personal readers can either be hired directly or contracted through a business
(once it is registered and tax compliant).

A personal reader does not need to be professionally qualified.

##  What support is available?

Work and Access will pay up to €12,500 per year towards the cost of a personal
reader.

The grant pays an hourly rate equal to the current [ minimum wage
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/) . If a reader with technical qualifications is needed, the hourly rate
will be decided based on the particular circumstances of the case.

The personal reader must not replace any reading help normally given by work
co-workers, relatives, or friends.

##  Who can get a Personal Reader Grant under Work and Access?

If you have a visual impairment or are blind and need help with reading at
work, you may be eligible to apply. Only an employee or self-employed person
can apply.

To get a Personal Reader support you must first [ meet the general eligibility
requirements for Work and Access. ](/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/)

You must be able to give evidence confirming your condition, unless you have
been getting a long-term disability payment.

You may need a Workplace Needs Assessment if you need a reader for work. If
you need a reader during a recruitment process, you won’t need a Workplace
Needs Assessment.

Work and Access is only available to private sector, community and voluntary
sector and not-for-profit organisations. Public sector employers should cover
the costs of any necessary adaptations or support for public sector workers.

If you are a student at college or university and are having difficulty with
reading because of a visual impairment, you should get in touch with the
Disability Liaison Officer for your college or university.

##  Finding the personal reader

You must find the personal reader yourself. There are a few ways to advertise
for the services of a personal reader, such as, placing an ad on an online job
site or community notice board.

##  How to apply

You can apply yourself or ask an advocate to apply on your behalf.

**Step 1:** **Complete the application form**

  * Request the [ WA1 form ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/297281/a9af4dab-6229-4c76-87a2-4bb3dfbfef2d.pdf#page=null) from your local Intreo Office or [ download it from gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/297281/a9af4dab-6229-4c76-87a2-4bb3dfbfef2d.pdf#page=null) . 
  * If you are unsure about the supports needed, you only complete the relevant section on the WA1 Form. 
  * Provide quotes to support your application (see [ Quotes in Appendix 6 of the Operational Guidelines). ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/429d6-operational-guidelines-work-and-access/#personal-reader:~:text=improving%20efficiency%2C%20accessibility.-,Quotes,-For%20each%20recommendation)

**Step 2: Eligibility check**

  * Send your completed WA1 Form by post to Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 
  * Your eligibility will be checked by the Work and Access Section 

**Step 3: Assessment and approval**

  * An officer will contact you directly to discuss your application. 
  * If eligible, you will be told about next steps and any additional sections of the application form to complete. 
  * Approval for eligibility does not guarantee funding. 
  * Final approval will be made after you meet specific requirements, set by Department officers. 

If you have a visual impairment or are blind, staff in your local Intreo
Centre or [ Citizens Information centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) will be pleased to help you
complete the application form.

####  **Appeals**

Work and Access is an administrative scheme so you have no right to appeal a
particular decision on your application.

If you are not happy with the decision, you can ask to have your case reviewed
by another DSP officer who was not involved in the original decision.

Write to the Department of Social Protection within 21 days of the decision,
explaining why you think the decision is wrong and provide any proof you have
to support your argument.

##  After your application is approved

If your application is approved, you will need to complete and return a
Personal Reader support Claim Form at the end of each month when using this
support.

The funding is paid directly to the service provider employed or contracted to
act as a personal reader.

##  More information

For more information about the Work and Access programme:

  * Read the Department of Social Protection [ Operational Guidelines for the Work and Access Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/429d6-operational-guidelines-work-and-access/)
  * Visit your local Intreo Centre 
  * Email: WorkandAccess@welfare.ie 
  * Write to: Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/personal-reader-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20Personal%20Reader%20Grants&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/personal-reader-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/personal-reader-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20Personal%20Reader%20Grants&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/personal-reader-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Needs Assessment Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-grant/)

The Workplace Needs Assessment Grant is part of the new Work and Access
employment programme, designed to help people with disabilities to find or
keep a job by removing or reducing workplace barriers.

1467.2572

  * [ _How to access your personal data under the GDPR_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document explains how to access your personal data under data protection
laws and the GDPR.

1375.8673

  * [ _Work and Access - In-Work Support Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-grant/)

The In-Work Support Grantis part of the new Work and Access employment
programme, designed to help people with disabilities to find or keep a job by
removing or reducing workplace barriers.

1231.6384

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

