**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Starting work and changing job ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/) > [ Training and looking for work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-
changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/) > Finding a job

#  Finding a job

  * Introduction 
  * Where to look for jobs 
  * Apply for a job 
  * Job interviews 
  * Schemes and training supports for jobseekers 

##  Introduction

If you are looking for a job, there are many ways to get information and
supports to help you in your search.

To be successful in your job search, stay updated on sources of information on
vacancies.

You can also look at other options, such as [ self-employment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-
employment/) , returning to education or [ volunteering
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/96fd7c-volunteer-services/) to get work
experience. If you are coming from outside Ireland to work, you can read about
[ migrant workers and unemployment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/migrant-workers-and-unemployment/) .

##  Where to look for jobs

You should regularly check these sources for new job opportunities:

###  Your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare branch office

Visit or call [ your local Intreo centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/map/?) for
information and advice on job vacancies. You can read more about [ employment
services for jobseekers ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/employment-supports/) .

###  Websites

The [ Jobs Ireland ](http://www.jobsireland.ie/) website lists jobs available
in Ireland and abroad. It also lists internships and employment programme
vacancies. You can upload your CV so employers can access it and contact you
directly.

###  Social media

Some social media sites post job vacancies and connect jobseekers with
employers. Some employers share job opportunities on their own company's
social media accounts.

###  Newspapers

National and local newspapers, both print and online, often list jobs.

###  Recruitment agencies

The National Recruitment Federation (NRF) has a directory of recruitment
agencies. You often need to register with these private companies, who may get
a fee from the employer if you get the job. Contact specialist recruitment
agencies if you are looking for a particular type of work.

###  Notices

Look for local jobs advertised in shop and restaurant windows, in libraries,
in supermarkets and on community noticeboards.

###  Open days and recruitment days

Some employers and industries hold open days to recruit staff. Find out about
these events online or in local newspapers.

###  Company websites

Visit the websites of companies relevant to your area of work. They may only
advertise vacancies on their own website.

###  Personal contacts

Ask friends or relatives if they know of job opportunities.

##  Apply for a job

When applying for a job, you usually need to give the employer your CV (
_curriculum vitae_ ) or complete an online application form. A good CV or
application is essential when looking for a job, so you can sell yourself to
an employer.

Your CV or application form includes your:

  * Contact details 
  * Qualifications and training 
  * Work experience 
  * Key skills 
  * References 

###  **Before sending your CV or application**

Research the company and the job and tailor your CV or application to match
the job’s requirements.

If the job advert asks for it, write a cover letter or fill out an application
form.

###  **Getting help with your CV, cover letter or online application form**

If you are unemployed, [ your local employment service (LES)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/d6f636-employment-services-offices/) can
help you with your CV, job application form and interview skills – see
‘Schemes and training supports for jobseekers’ below.

You can also contact your local Youth Information Centre for help with your CV
and cover letter. [ Youth Information Centres
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/) are located all around
Ireland. They offer a free, confidential information service to people aged 12
to 25.

###  **Employment equality**

Employment equality legislation protects you during the job application
process. Employers cannot discriminate against you based on race, gender, age
or family status. You can find out about all [ 9 grounds of discrimination
](/en/employment/equality-in-work/equality-in-the-workplace/) .

##  Job interviews

Prepare for your job interview by:

  * Researching the company and the role 
  * Practicing your answers to sample questions 
  * Being very familiar with your CV and application form 
  * Planning your journey to make a good impression 

You can get useful [ interview tips online ](https://jobsireland.ie/en-
US/TipsandAdvicePage#Tipsonhowtoprepareforajobinterview) .

If you are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech impairment, you can apply
for the [ Job Interview Interpreter Grant (JIIG)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/job-interview-interpreter-grant-scheme/) to get an interpreter’s
assistance.

###  **After the interview**

After the interview, you can ask the employer for feedback on your
performance. They don’t have to give you feedback, but they may do so as a
_courtesy_ (politeness).

**Can I see my interview notes?**

If the employer ignores or refuses your informal request for interview
feedback, you have the right to request your interview notes under the [
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/) .

##  Schemes and training supports for jobseekers

[ Local Employment Services (LES)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/d6f636-employment-services-offices/) , help
people who are long-term unemployed to:

  * Find jobs 
  * Connect with local employers 
  * Get information on training options and employment schemes 

Find more information on getting a job on the [ Irish National Organisation of
the Unemployed ](http://www.inou.ie/) website.

###  **Schemes for people getting social welfare payments**

If you have been on jobseeker payments, or certain other social welfare
payments for a certain length of time, you can apply for [ employment support
schemes ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/) . These
schemes help people who are long-term unemployed to return to work.

Some schemes, such as the [ Community Employment (CE) scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/) , provide
jobs in the community. Other schemes, such as the [ Back to Work Enterprise
Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/social-welfare-payments-and-work/back-to-work-enterprise-
allowance/) , helps you become self-employed while also keeping some of your
payment.

The [ Training Support Grant (TSG) ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Training-
Support-Grant.aspx) is also available for jobseekers who get certain other
payments. The TSG is for short-term training that is not available from
another state provider, or training that will help you to get a job quickly.

_**Page edited:** 31 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/finding-and-getting-a-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Finding%20a%20job&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/finding-and-getting-a-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/finding-and-getting-a-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Finding%20a%20job&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/finding-and-getting-a-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rules for getting a jobseeker's payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/)

The conditions you must meet to get a jobseeker’s payment and the penalties
that apply if you do not meet these conditions.

1238.88

  * [ _Information for younger jobseekers_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/)

Younger jobseekers must meet the same conditions as all other jobseekers but
there are some targeted supports to help them into work.

1149.5243

  * [ _Finding somewhere to live when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/finding-somewhere-to-live-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to find accommodation when you return to
Ireland.

1062.3473

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

