**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Starting work and changing job ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/) > [ Changing job ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/changing-job/) > Leaving your job

#  Leaving your job

  * Introduction 
  * Notice periods 
  * How much notice should I give? 
  * Can I leave before my notice period ends? 
  * I have outstanding annual leave 
  * Can I change my mind? 
  * Getting references 
  * Contact the WRC 

##  Introduction

When you decide to change your job, there are important steps to follow in
terms of giving proper notice and getting references.

There is a legal requirement to inform your employer that you intend to leave,
called _giving notice_ .

##  Notice periods

A notice period is the amount of time you must inform your employer before
leaving your job (for example, 2 weeks or a month). It allows both you and
your employer to prepare for the transition.

The length of notice you must give is set down in law and is usually stated in
your [ employment contract ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) .

The laws governing notice periods are detailed in the [ Minimum Notice and
Terms of Employment Acts 1973–2005
](https://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1973_0004.htm)
.

##  How much notice should I give?

Check what your contract says about giving notice and follow those rules. If
you want to negotiate a different arrangement, you should discuss this with
your employer.

###  **There is no notice period in my contract**

_Statutory minimum notice_ is the shortest notice period that you can give
under Irish law. If your contract does not state a notice period, you must
provide the legal minimum, which is **one week** .

The full rules on giving notice are set out in the [ Minimum Notice and Terms
of Employment Acts 1973–2005
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1973/en/act/pub/0004/index.html) . The legal
(or ‘statutory’) minimum notice is set out in [ Section 6
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1973/act/4/section/6/enacted/en/html#sec6)
of the Act.

###  **I worked for less than 13 weeks**

You do not have to give notice if:

  * You worked for your employer for less than 13 weeks, **and**
  * There is no employment contract specifying a notice period 

##  Can I leave before my notice period ends?

Usually, you are required to work the notice period.

Sometimes, your employer may agree that you can leave your job without working
until the end of your notice period. Your employer may offer you pay instead
of notice for that period.

Payment instead (or ‘in lieu’) of notice is covered in [ Section 7
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1973/act/4/section/7/enacted/en/html#sec7)
of the Minimum Notice and Terms of Employment Act 1973.

##  I have outstanding annual leave

If you leave your job without taking all the [ annual leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-
leave/) you are entitled to, your employer must pay you for the unused days.

Some employers may offer leave instead (or ‘in lieu’) of notice. These
arrangements are not covered by legislation, so you must agree this with your
employer.

##  Can I change my mind?

Once you have given notice, the only way to withdraw it is by reaching an
agreement with your employer.

##  Getting references

When applying for a new job, you may want to ask your current or former
employer for a _reference_ . The person who gives you a reference is called a
_referee_ .

The reference can be written or spoken and usually includes information about:

  * How long you worked for the employer 
  * Your job responsibilities 
  * Your attendance record 
  * Your job performance 
  * Your suitability for the new job 

###  **Am I entitled to a reference by law?**

There is no legal requirement for your current or previous employer to give
you a reference. Few employment contracts include the right to have a
reference when you leave.

Employers usually provide references when asked. If they do this for some
employees, they should do it for all employees without discrimination.

###  **Can an employer provide false information in my reference?**

Your current employer has a duty of care to you and your new employer. If they
give you a reference, it must be true, fair, accurate and not misleading.

###  **My employer gave me an unfair or inaccurate reference**

If you believe your employer has given an unfair and inaccurate reference, and
it has caused you harm, you may have grounds to sue them for negligence.

If you think the reference is _defamatory_ (you believe your reputation has
been injured due to the reference), you may sue the employer under the [
Defamation Act 2009
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2009/en/act/pub/0031/index.html) .

Read about [ taking a civil case
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-
appealing-a-civil-case/) in Ireland. You can also [ contact the Workplace
Relations Commission ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/) for
information and advice.

###  **Can I read my reference?**

You have the right to access information about you, including your personnel
records, under the [ General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/know-your-rights/right-access-
information) .

Personnel records include written and, if recorded, verbal references.
However, you may not have access to the reference if the opinion was provided
in confidence or with the understanding that it would remain confidential.

##  Contact the WRC

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 13 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/changing-job/giving-
notice/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Leaving%20your%20job&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/changing-job/giving-
notice/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/changing-job/giving-
notice/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Leaving%20your%20job&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/changing-job/giving-
notice/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Cookie notice_ ](/en/about/cookies/)

The Cookie notice gives information about cookies used on
citizensinformation.ie and how you can manage your cookie preferences.

956.14655

  * [ _Redundancy notice periods_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-notice-periods/)

If you are being made redundant, your job won’t end straight away. By law, you
are entitled to a minimum paid notice period.

926.7644

  * [ _Debt Relief Notices_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-notices/)

People on very low incomes who cannot pay their debts may apply for a Debt
Relief Notice.

923.6813

  * [ _Rules about giving evidence_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/rules-about-giving-evidence/)

The rules for witnesses giving evidence in a court of law.

885.9013

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

