**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Irish education system ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/) >
Admissions policies in primary and secondary schools

#  Admissions policies in primary and secondary schools

  * Introduction 
  * The law around school admissions 
  * How schools select and prioritise students who apply 
  * Selection criteria for Irish languageschools 
  * Admission of students with a disability or with special educational needs 
  * Applying to more than one school 
  * What happens if my child is not acceptedinto a school? 
  * How do I appeal if a school decides not to accept my child? 

##  Introduction

In Ireland, students usually attend their local school but you can apply for
your child to attend any school in the country.

You can send your child to the school of your choice, provided there is a
place available for them.

Where there is a shortage of places, the school must give priority based on
their admissions policy and Annual Admission Notice. These must be approved by
the school’s [ board of management ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/) . They should be
published on the school’s website and available in writing to you when you ask
for them.

##  The law around school admissions

The [ Education (Admission to Schools) Act 2018
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/act/14/enacted/en) aims to make the
rules around admissions to schools more structured, fair and transparent.

####  Fees and contributions

Schools cannot charge fees or ask for contributions as a condition for
admission or continued admission, with the exception of fee-charging secondary
schools, boarding schools and admission to post leaving certificate or further
education courses run by post-primary schools.

####  Religion

Primary schools cannot use religion as a basis for admission and cannot
prioritise students based on their religious beliefs. However, there are some
exceptions to this:

  * A school that provides religious instruction or education in a minority religion can prioritise a student of that religion who is looking for admission to a school that provides religious instruction or education consistent with, or similar to, their religious beliefs 
  * A school that aims to promote certain religious values can refuse to admit a student who is not of that religious denomination if it can prove that the refusal is essential to maintain the ethos of the school 

####  Admittance based on the date of application

Schools cannot use the time and date on which they get an application as a
basis for admission. This means that applications cannot be allocated on a
first-come first-served basis.

Schools must admit pupils based on their admissions policy and admission
notice.

####  Admission notice

A school’s board of management must publish an annual admission notice before
accepting any applications for a given year. The notice must be published on
the school’s website and be available to you on written request.

The admission notice must tell you

  * How to get a copy of the school’s admission policy 
  * How to get an application form for admission 
  * The date when the school will start to accept applications for the year 
  * The deadline for receiving applications 
  * The date the school will inform you of their decision 
  * The date by which you must accept a place 

If a school is not over-subscribed, the school should continue to accept all
applicants even after that deadline has passed.

The admission policy must state that the school will [ accommodate the
admission of children with a disability or other special educational needs
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/act/2022/22/eng/enacted/a2222.pdf)
. It must co-operate with the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) in
providing special needs education.

####  Waiting lists

Schools must phase out existing waiting lists by 31 January 2025. In the
future, a school can keep a list of students who were unsuccessful because the
school was over-subscribed. The school must use this list to fill any
vacancies that arise during the school year.

####  Reasons a school cannot use for selection

A school cannot take the following reasons into account when selecting
students:

  * A student’s attendance at a pre-school (although they may consider attendance at an early-intervention class or early-start pre-school) 
  * A student’s academic ability, skills or aptitude (although these may be considered in applications for post-leaving certificate courses or further education courses or certain circumstances in special education (see below) 
  * The occupation, financial status, academic ability, skills or aptitudes of a student’s parents 
  * Attendance by the student or their parents at an interview or open day (although an interview may be taken into account for admission to the residential element of a boarding school) 
  * The date and time the application was received by the school as long as it is submitted during the period set in the admission notice) 

####  Withdrawal of applications

A school may withdraw its offer of acceptance if:

  * You have given wrong or misleading information in the application 
  * You fail to confirm acceptance of the offer by the date set by the school in its annual admission notice 
  * You fail to confirm in writing that you accept the school’s behaviour policy and that you will make all reasonable efforts to ensure compliance with the policy when required to do so by the school 
  * You do not tell the school about any offers from other schools 

##  How schools select and prioritise students who apply

In general, schools must accept all students who apply to them unless they get
more applications than there are places (in other words, if the school is
over-subscribed).

All schools must have an admissions policy. This outlines the rules that are
applied if the school is over-subscribed. These selection rules help the
school decide which students to accept and in what order.

Schools cannot discriminate on any of the following grounds:

  * Gender 
  * Civil status 
  * Family status 
  * Sexual orientation 
  * Religion 
  * Disability 
  * Race 
  * Membership of the Traveller community 
  * Special educational needs 

There are some exceptions to these rules:

**Gender**

If a school admits only students of one gender (such as an all-girls or all-
boys school), it does not have to accept a student of a different gender.

**Religious ethos**

Many schools in Ireland promote certain religious values. These schools are
not allowed to discriminate by admitting students of a particular religion in
preference to others, except in the following circumstances:

  * If a school aims to promote certain religious values, it can refuse to admit a student who is not of that religious denomination if it can prove that the refusal is essential to maintain the ethos of the school. 
  * If a school provides religious instruction or education in a minority religion, it can prioritise a student of that religion who wants to attend a school that provides religious instruction or education consistent with, or similar to, their religious beliefs 

Students have the right to attend a religious school without getting any
religious instruction.

##  Selection criteria for Irish languageschools

Irish language schools can give priority to students who have a reasonable,
age-appropriate level of oral fluency in the Irish language and the school is
satisfied that student's fluency would regress if they were not admitted to
the Irish language school.

An Irish language post-primary school may give priority to students who have
attended an Irish language primary school.

##  Admission of students with a disability or with special educational needs

Schools cannot discriminate based on a child having a disability or a special
educational need. In theory, this means that you should be able to apply to
any school and that school should be able to accommodate your child. However,
in practice, some schools do not have the facilities to accept students with
severe special needs.

If you prefer your child to attend a special school or a special class in a
school that caters for specific types of disabilities the selection criteria
above apply.

If the school you are applying to is a ‘special school’, it can refuse to
admit your child if they do not have the specified category of special need
concerned. The school must state this in its admission notice.

If you are applying for your child to enter a ‘special class’ in a school that
was established to provide exclusively for students with certain categories of
special needs, the school can refuse to admit your child to that class if they
do not have the specified category of special need concerned. The school must
state this in its admission notice.

**What if I can’t find an appropriate school for my child with special
needs?**

Some schools do not have the facilities to accept students with severe special
needs. If there is no school in your area with facilities for your child, the
[ National Council for Special Education (NCSE) ](https://ncse.ie/for-parents)
or [ Tusla – the Child and Family Agency
](http://www.tusla.ie/services/educational-welfare-services) can help you.
They can designate a school in your area for your child and that [ school must
make additional provisions ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/8a499-statement-from-minister-of-state-for-special-education-and-
inclusion-josepha-madigan-td-announcing-significant-increase-in-special-
education-provision-in-dublin/) for your child to attend.

The [ Education (Provision in Respect of Children with Special Educational
Needs) Act 2022
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/act/2022/22/eng/enacted/a2222.pdf)
makes additional provision for children with special educational needs. The
Department of Education has published information for schools about p [
roviding for children with special education needs
](https://assets.gov.ie/240372/f025d1bf-0cb9-44cb-9eed-b4d092fc9158.pdf) .

##  Applying to more than one school

You can apply to more than one school but you cannot accept more than one
place.

If you accept an offer from one school and you have applied to one or more
other schools, you must tell the school that you are accepting the offer from
about any offers you have or are expecting from the other schools you have
applied to.

You should check the schools admission policy for the rules around how you
should notify the school.

Under the Education (Admission to Schools) Act 2018, school boards of
management can share information with each other about applications received,
offers made and offers accepted.

##  What happens if my child is not acceptedinto a school?

If your child is not accepted into a school you have applied to, the school
should write to you and give you the reason or reasons for the refusal. It
should also give you information about your child’s place on the waiting list
and explain your child’s ranking against the school’s selection criteria.

The school may recommend another suitable school for you to apply to if they
cannot accept your child.

If you have difficulty finding a place for your child in a local school,
contact the [ Educational Welfare Service of Tusla – the Child and Family
Agency ](http://www.tusla.ie/services/educational-welfare-services) on
01-7718500.

##  How do I appeal if a school decides not to accept my child?

You can appeal a school’s decision not to enrol your child.

**If a school refuses to enrol your child because it is oversubscribed** , you
must first request the school’s board of management to review this decision.
You must make your request for a review using the [ Board of Management
Request Form (BOMR1) ](https://assets.gov.ie/93551/715a4155-c441-45fc-
ab46-b5690c47b532.pdf) . The board of management must notify you of the
outcome of your request for a review within 42 days from the date of the
decision to refuse admission to the school.

You can make a Section 29 appeal to the Department of Education, when you have
received the outcome of the review by the board or 42 days after the decision
to refuse admission is made - whichever of these is earliest. However, you
must make your Section 29 appeal to the Department of Education no later than
63 days after the school's original decision to refuse admission. You make
your appeal using a [ Section 29 appeal application form
](https://assets.gov.ie/97231/64a395b0-fce6-4449-a540-4464e059909a.pdf) . The
Department has [ Frequently Asked Questions about Section 29 appeals when a
school is oversubscribed ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/90de23-appeal-
against-permanent-exclusion-suspension-or-refusal-to-enrol/) .

**If a school refuses to admit your child for a reason other than the school
being oversubscribed** , you can make your appeal to the Department of
Education using a [ Section 29 appeal application form
](https://assets.gov.ie/97228/f013becd-f43a-4d92-9bdd-151265cad74a.pdf) .

Before making a Section 29 appeal, you can request a review of the board of
management's decision not to admit your child. To get a review, you use the [
Review by the Board of Management Request Form (BOMR1)
](https://assets.gov.ie/93551/715a4155-c441-45fc-ab46-b5690c47b532.pdf) . If
you request a review, the board of management must notify you of the outcome
within 42 days from the date of the decision to refuse admission to the
school.

If you don’t want a review, you can immediately apply for an independent
Section 29 appeal.

Your Section 29 appeal must be made no later than 63 days following the
original decision by the school to refuse admission.

The Department has [ Frequently Asked Questions about Section 29 appeals for
reasons other than a school being oversubscribed
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/90de23-appeal-against-permanent-exclusion-
suspension-or-refusal-to-enrol/) .

###  Department of Education

Section 29 Appeals Administration Unit  
Department of Education  
Friar’s Mill Road  
Mullingar  
Co Westmeath  
N91 H30Y

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education)

**Email:** [ section29@education.gov.ie ](mailto:section29@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 25 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Admissions%20policies%20in%20primary%20and%20secondary%20schools&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Admissions%20policies%20in%20primary%20and%20secondary%20schools&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Special needs education in primary schools_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-schools/)

The arrangements for special needs education in primary schools include
learning support and resource teachers, and special needs assistants.

2254.8804

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1984.1981

  * [ _Curriculum in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-curriculum/)

An outline of the primary school curriculum, including its aims, structure and
content.

1860.8734

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

