**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Checklist when applying for carer's leave

#  Checklist when applying for carer's leave

  * Introduction 

##  Introduction

To apply for carer’s leave you should follow the procedures below.

###  1\. Check if you qualify for carer’s leave

You must have worked for your employer for 12 months without a break. The
Department of Social Protection. (DSP) must decide that the person you are
proposing to care for is in need of full-time care and attention – see 2
below.

###  2\. Apply to DSP for a decision that the person needs full-time care

If the person you intend to care for is over 16, their GP must complete part
of the [ application form for Carer's Benefit (pdf).
](https://www.gov.ie/en/form/00f54d-carers-benefit-carb1/) Your employer must
also fill in part of this form giving your employment details. You should send
the completed application form to DSP, who will decide whether the person you
will be caring for needs that care. DSP will also check if you are eligible
for [ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) .

###  3\. How much carers leave am I entitled to?

Under the [ Carer’s Leave Act 2001
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2001/act/19/enacted/en/html) , you are
entitled to at least 13 weeks’ carer’s leave up to a maximum of 104 weeks. You
can apply to take it in one continuous period or for a number of shorter
periods. There must be a gap of at least 6 weeks between the periods of
carer’s leave.

If your employer agrees you can take a shorter period of leave. However, your
employer can refuse (if they have good reason) to allow you to take carer's
leave of less than 13 weeks and must give you the reasons for the refusal in
writing.

###  4\. Give notice to your employer

You must give your employer at least 6 weeks’ notice in writing saying when
and how you plan to take carer’s leave, and whether it will be in one block or
separate periods. You should confirm that you have applied to DSP for a
decision on the person for whom you propose to care. You can find a sample
notice of intention form in Appendix A of the [ Carer's Leave Act explanatory
booklet (pdf)
](https://employmentrightsadvice.ie/Documents/Guide_to_the_Carers_Leave_Act.pdf)
. In emergency situations where you cannot give 6 weeks' notice, you should
give notice as soon as possible.

###  5\. Confirmation of carer’s leave

You and your employer must sign a document confirming the arrangement for
carer's leave, at least 2 weeks before you begin the leave. The document
should state the start date, how long it will last, and specify how you will
take it. You can find a sample confirmation document in Appendix B of the
Carer's Leave Act explanatory booklet (pdf). Your employer keeps the signed
document and gives you a copy of it.

This document is flexible, which means that your arrangement to take carer's
leave can be amended, even if you have already started your leave.

###  More information

You can find out more about [ carer’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/) . You can contact
Workplace Relations Commission's [ Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/) for information about
carer’s leave.

For information about Carer's Benefit, contact your [ local social welfare
office or Intreo centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/service/40cf48-find-your-local-intreo-
office/) .

_**Page edited:** 11 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Checklist%20when%20applying%20for%20carer%27s%20leave&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Checklist%20when%20applying%20for%20carer%27s%20leave&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Applying for a driving licence_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/full-driving-licence/)

Driving licences are issued if you pass a driving test. Rules about driving
licences, forms and how to apply.

1202.6018

  * [ _Applying for international protection in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/applying-for-refugee-status-in-ireland/)

Rules and processes involved in applying for international protection in
Ireland.

1158.6735

  * [ _Applying for social housing_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/)

How to qualify for social housing support from a local authority or other
provider.

1157.8241

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

