**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/) > [ Studying
abroad ](/en/education/third-level-education/studying-abroad/) > Studying in
the UK including Northern Ireland

#  Studying in the UK including Northern Ireland

  * Studying in the UK 
  * College courses in the UK 
  * UK tuition fees 
  * Applying to study in the UK 
  * Useful contacts 

##  Studying in the UK

If you live in Ireland and are thinking of doing a third-level course in
Northern Ireland (NI) or elsewhere in the United Kingdom (UK) there is a wide
range of courses available.

Most UK undergraduate courses last 3 years but in Scotland they last 4 years.
The application process starts earlier than in Ireland. This means you should
begin looking at courses at least 12 months before you plan to start studying.
The application procedure for all UK undergraduate courses is the same.

Before you apply, you should find out about the different structures and costs
for [ third-level education in the UK ](https://www.gov.uk/student-finance) ,
in particular fees and living costs.

The United Kingdom (UK) includes England, Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland. There are [ different fee arrangements for each country within the UK
](http://www.ucas.com/how-it-all-works/student-finance) .

**Common Travel Area**

The [ Common Travel Area (CTA) ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-
uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/) gives Irish and UK citizens
the right to access all levels of education and training in each other’s
state. You must also meet the residency criteria to access financial supports.

You must be resident in Ireland or the UK for 3 years before the start of your
course to be eligible under the CTA. You can find more information in [
Student finance: how you’re assessed and paid 2023 to 2024
](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/student-finance-how-youre-
assessed-and-paid/student-finance-how-youre-assessed-and-paid-2023-to-2024) .

If you are an Irish citizen student and meet the residency criteria, you can
study in the UK for the [ same rate of fees as British students
](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/student-finance-how-youre-
assessed-and-paid/student-finance-how-youre-assessed-and-paid-2023-to-2024) in
the UK and may be eligible for a maintenance grant under the Irish [ Student
Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-
third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) \- see below.

##  College courses in the UK

###  Finding a course

If you do not know the course you wish to study or you want to find out about
different courses or colleges there are useful online resources.

The [ British Council website Education UK ](https://study-
uk.britishcouncil.org/) allows you to search for undergraduate and
postgraduate courses by subject, by university or by specific area such as
Northern Ireland. It has a summary of information about each college or
university with contact details and you can make online request for brochures
about the courses. It also has general information about living in the UK
including accommodation and working while studying.

You can find [ information about UK higher education institutions and courses
](https://www.gov.uk/higher-education-courses-find-and-apply) on the GOV.UK
website.

###  Undergraduate course

[ UCAS (University and Colleges Admissions Service) ](http://www.ucas.com/) is
the central applications body for full-time undergraduate courses at UK
universities and colleges. Its website has all the information you need to
apply to college including: how to apply, fees and information about the
colleges. Applications must be made online through the UCAS website.

[ Use the UCAS tariff calculator ](https://www.ucas.com/ucas/tariff-
calculator) to calculate the tariff points required for entry to higher
education. It allows you to compare Leaving Certificate and GCSE A level
grades. A Leaving Certificate subject at honours level is approximately
equivalent to two-thirds of an A level.

[ There is a complete list of dates for applications on the UCAS website
](https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/getting-started/when-apply) .

###  Postgraduate study

There are 2 types of postgraduate study: taught courses and research. Taught
courses often last just 1 year while research can continue for 3 years or
more.

You need to consider what kind of postgraduate study you wish to do, what are
the most suitable courses for you and your career and what costs are involved.

[ Prospects ](https://www.prospects.ac.uk/) is the official graduate prospects
website for the UK. It has information on postgraduate study, jobs and career
advice. It has information on full-time and part-time courses. You can search
by geographical area and by subject. For postgraduate courses in the UK, you
apply directly to the university or college. Most of them have application
forms available online.

You can also search for postgraduate courses on the [ UCAS website
](https://www.ucas.com/postgraduate/choosing-postgraduate-course) .

##  UK tuition fees

As an Irish citizen within the Common Travel Area, you will have to pay fees
in the same way as UK students. Tuition fees are not the only expense when
studying in the UK you also need to consider accommodation and living costs.

###  Undergraduate courses  

**England, Wales and Northern Ireland:** Universities and colleges can charge
new students up to £9,250 sterling a year for undergraduate courses.

You can apply for a tuition fee loan which you only have to [ repay after you
have graduated ](https://www.gov.uk/repaying-your-student-loan/when-you-start-
repaying) . However, you are not entitled to maintenance support in the same
way as home students. If you are an Irish citizen who has been settled in the
UK for over 3 years you will be classed as a home student and will be able to
apply for financial support for living costs.

  
**Scotland:** Since 2021-2022, Irish students who start a full-time degree
course in Scotland must pay the same fee structure as an English student
studying in Scotland. You can apply for a tuition fee loan if you meet the [
relevant residence criteria ](https://www.saas.gov.uk/need-to-know/brexit) .

You may be eligible for a maintenance grant if you meet the criteria for the
Irish [ Student Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-
supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) but this does not
include funding for tuition fees. You may claim [ tax relief on third-level
fees ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/) . There is detailed information on
the range of Irish grants and funds for students in further and higher
education at [ studentfinance.ie ](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-
performance/funding/student-finance/) .

The [ GOV.UK website ](https://www.gov.uk/browse/education/student-finance)
has information on the [ financial supports available for Irish citizens
](https://www.ucas.com/finance/student-finance-england/finance-full-time-eu-
students) studying in the UK including Northern Ireland.

###  Postgraduate courses

The tuition fees for postgraduate study vary from institution to institution
and course to course. Postgraduate prospectuses give up-to-date fees.

There are different sources of funding for postgraduate students. Some courses
include funding. Sometimes financial support is available from the university
that is running the postgraduate course; sometimes you need to apply to an
external body.

Awards are available for a range of subjects, both for taught courses and
research programmes. They vary as to amount, duration and whether they only
cover fees or include maintenance as well. There are strict eligibility rules
and deadlines for application and you should be aware that there are a large
number of postgraduates competing for limited funding.

Funding is available under the [ Student Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-
scheme/) for postgraduate study in Northern Ireland but not for postgraduate
study in Britain. You may claim [ tax relief on third-level fees
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/) .

A number of scholarships and fellowships for study abroad are awarded annually
by foreign governments to Irish students who are engaged in or have completed
a course of third-level education. The [ North-South Masters Bursaries
](http://universitiesireland.ie/bursaries-scholarships/) fund a small number
of Irish students to study in Northern Ireland together with some Northern
Irish students studying in Ireland.

Visit the following websites for more information on postgraduate funding:  
[ Research Councils UK ](https://www.ukri.org/councils/)  
[ Prospects ](https://www.prospects.ac.uk/)  
[ Scholarship Search UK ](http://www.scholarship-
search.org.uk/pls/mon/hc_edufin.page_pls_user_studmoney?x=16180339&y=&a=220707)

##  Applying to study in the UK

**Undergraduate courses**

UCAS (University and Colleges Admissions Service) is the central applications
body for full-time undergraduate courses at UK universities and colleges.

If you need help or advice on your UCAS application, contact the Customer
Service Unit and remember to quote your UCAS Personal ID/application number.
You can also read the [ Frequently Asked Questions
](https://www.ucas.com/about-us/who-we-are/how-can-we-help/faqs) .

If you are an Irish student, and applying through UCAS, they will send you an
application form for a tuition fee loan when you are offered a place on a
course.

**Postgraduate courses**

For postgraduate courses in the UK, you apply directly to the university or
college.

##  Useful contacts

###  UCAS (Universities and Colleges Admissions Service)

Customer Service Unit

PO Box 28  
Cheltenham  
GL52 3LZ  
United Kingdom

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 8:30 am- 6 pm

**Tel:** +44 871 468 0 468

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ucas.ac.uk/ ](http://www.ucas.ac.uk/)

**Email:** [ enquiries@ucas.ac.uk ](mailto:enquiries@ucas.ac.uk)

###  Student Finance Services European Team

Student Loans Company

PO Box 89  
Darlington  
County Durham  
England  
DL1 9AZ

**Tel:** +44 141 243 3570

###  Student Awards Agency Scotland

Saughton House  
Broomhouse Drive  
Edinburgh  
EH11 3UT

**Tel:** +44 300 555 0505

**Homepage:** [ https://www.saas.gov.uk/ ](https://www.saas.gov.uk/)

_**Page edited:** 19 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/studying-abroad/studying-in-the-uk-including-northern-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Studying%20in%20the%20UK%20including%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/studying-abroad/studying-in-the-uk-including-northern-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/studying-abroad/studying-in-the-uk-including-northern-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Studying%20in%20the%20UK%20including%20Northern%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/studying-abroad/studying-in-the-uk-including-northern-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Common Travel Area between Ireland and the UK_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/)

This page discusses the Common Travel Area between Ireland and the UK, an area
which is not specifically provided for in legislation.

1879.1152

  * [ _Supports for Ukrainians in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/supports-for-ukrainians-in-ireland/)

This page has information on organisations that are helping people who have
come to Ireland because of the war in Ukraine.

1463.8944

  * [ _Coming to Ireland from Ukraine_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine/)

Information for people who have come to Ireland because of the war in Ukraine.

1365.625

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

