**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to post-primary school ](/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/) > Starting post-
primary school

#  Starting post-primary school

  * Introduction 
  * Choosing a post-primary school 
  * Enrolling your child at post-primary school 
  * Your child in post-primary school 
  * Further information on post-primary 

##  Introduction

The post-primary or second-level education is for students aged 12 to 18
years. Attendance at school is compulsory for students aged under 16.

Most children start post-primary school at the age of 12 or 13. They must be
at least 12 years of age on 1 January in the year they start post-primary
school.

There are different [ types of post-primary school ](/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-
school/) .

##  Choosing a post-primary school

When choosing a school, you can consider factors such as:

  * **The admissions policy** : This should be described in the school plan, which the school must publish 
  * **The curriculum:** the range of subjects offered by the school 
  * **School discipline:** Under the [ Education (Welfare) Act 2000 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/pdf/2000/en.act.2000.0022.pdf) (pdf) the board of management must draw up a code of behaviour for students 
  * **Programmes and subjects offered** : Junior Cycle programme, Junior Certificate School Programme, Transition Year, established Leaving Certificate, Leaving Certificate Applied, the Leaving Certificate Vocational and other programmes to support personal and social development 
  * **Streaming of students:** Streaming students means dividing them into different classes for all subjects from the time they start secondary school, based on the school's assessment of their ability. 
  * **Assessment of students' progress and feedback to parents and students:** Checking students' progress, feedback to parents, arrangements for parent-teacher meetings 
  * **Facilities:** What student facilities are provided, for example, a library, access to computers, a language laboratory and facilities for lunch, PE and recreation. 
  * **Support services:** guidance counsellor, remedial support for students, pastoral care 
  * **Extra-curricular activities** : such as sports, clubs or debating 
  * **Other factors** include the school ethos (details should be in the school plan); student and parental involvement in the life of the school; whether it has a student council or a parents' association. 

##  Enrolling your child at post-primary school

You can send your child to the post-primary school of your choice, provided
there is a place available. Where there is shortage of space, the school must
give priority based on the admissions policy. This is drawn up by the board of
management and should be available to you on request.

To enrol your child, check [ the list of post-primary schools in your area
](http://www.education.ie/en/find-a-school) . Contact the school of your
choice to see if there is a place available. The school of your choice may
place your child on a waiting list or you may need to contact other schools to
find a place.

You can find out more about [ admissions to school ](/en/education/the-irish-
education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/) .

##  Your child in post-primary school

**School books and uniforms**

Many post-primary schools do not charge fees. However, students must pay for
books and examination fees. In addition, there are other costs, such as school
uniforms. There are schemes to help low-income families meet the [ costs of
schooling. ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-
supports/financial-help-with-school/)

While students do not have to wear a uniform at primary school, many schools
(in consultation with parents) have introduced school uniforms. Check with
your school about their policy. The Department has published [ recommendations
on school uniforms and the
](https://circulars.gov.ie/pdf/circular/education/2017/32.pdf) [ weight of
schoolbags ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/38307/374308eaf81b4758ad9e4afe9c8e58fd.pdf) .

**Exams in post-primary**

Secondary-level education consists of a three-year [ Junior Cycle,
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-
school/junior-cycle/) followed by a two-year or three-year Senior Cycle.

The [ Junior Cycle Profile of Achievement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/junior-
cycle-exam-and-results/) examination is taken at the end of the Junior Cycle.

In the [ Senior Cycle ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/senior-cycle/) , there is an optional
one-year [ Transition Year ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/transition-year/) programme followed by
a choice of three Leaving Certificate programmes. Each of the 3 Leaving
Certificate programmes lasts for 2 years.

  * The [ Established Leaving Certificate ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/)
  * The [ Leaving Certificate Applied ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-applied/)
  * The [ Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-programme/)

##  Further information on post-primary

Further information on post-primary education is available:

  * Education for students with [ special educational needs ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-schools/)
  * [ Assistive technology grant for students with disabilities ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/assistive-technology-grant-students-with-disabilities/)
  * [ Examination arrangements for students with disabilities ](/en/education/state-examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-disabilities/)
  * [ School transport for post-primary students ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-transport-scheme/)
  * [ Special educational arrangements for Travellers ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/educational-arrangements-for-travellers/)
  * [ Measures to address educational disadvantage ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/measures-to-address-educational-disadvantage/)
  * [ Resources for non-English speakers. ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/resources-for-non-english-speakers/)
  * Your options when [ leaving school ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/leaving-school/)

_**Page edited:** 4 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Starting%20post-
primary%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Starting%20post-
primary%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

2802.085

  * [ _Choosing a post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-school/)

There are different types of post-primary school. The main difference is in
how your school is managed, how it is funded and who owns your school.

2560.356

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

2446.054

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

