**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Irish education system ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/) >
Exemption from studying Irish

#  Exemption from studying Irish

  * What is an exemption from studying Irish? 
  * Who can apply for an exemption from studying Irish? 
  * How to apply for an exemption from studying Irish 
  * How to appeal a decision 
  * Irish language requirements for third-level courses 

##  What is an exemption from studying Irish?

Irish is one of the core subjects in the school curriculum in Ireland. All
students must study Irish unless they are given an exemption from studying the
subject. If you get an exemption, you do not have to study Irish at school.

You can apply for an exemption from studying Irish in primary and secondary
school.

You can only apply if English is the main language of instruction in your
school. You cannot get an exemption from Irish in a school where Irish is the
main language of instruction.

An exemption is only given in certain circumstances. The student must meet
certain criteria – see ‘Who can apply for an exemption from studying Irish’
below.

Detailed information about the exemption from studying Irish in school, is set
out in the Department of Education’s Circular [ 54/2022
](https://www.gov.ie/en/circular/28b2b-exemptions-from-the-study-of-irish-
primary/) (for primary schools) and [ Circular 55/2022
](https://www.gov.ie/en/circular/f33d5-exemptions-from-the-study-of-irish-
post-primary/) (for post-primary schools). An exemption from the study of
Irish can only be made under the rules outlined in the Circular in place at
the time of application. You can find more information about the rules
governing the exemption from Irish before September 2022 from the Department
of Education.

##  Who can apply for an exemption from studying Irish?

If you are a parent or guardian, you can apply for your child to be exempt
from the study of Irish if you think they meet the criteria. Your child must
be enrolled in an English-medium mainstream school. A student over 18 years of
age can also apply for an exemption.

Your child will only be considered for exemption from studying Irish in
exceptional circumstances.

The decision to exempt a student is made by the principal of the school
following discussion with a student’s parents or guardians, the class teacher,
special education teachers and the student themselves.

If a child is granted an exemption, they can choose not to use the exemption
and take part in Irish classes or examinations. However, they do not lose the
right to use the exemption in the future.

###  Students who may get an exemption from the study of Irish:

###

###  **Students moving from abroad**

Students coming to live in Ireland from abroad may get an exemption if:

  * A child is enrolling for the first time after completed a full course of primary education outside the State, and did not have the opportunity to study Irish 
  * A child aged 12 or over who received their education outside the State for at least 3 consecutive years, and did not have the opportunity to study Irish 
  * A child of a foreign diplomatic or consular representative in Ireland (primary schools only) 

###  Students with literacy difficulties

A student who has at least reached second class and meets all of the following
conditions can also get an exemption:

  * The student has significant literacy difficulty that persists after having access to a differentiated approach to language and literacy over time. This should be documented in a Student Support Plan. 
  * The student has a standardised score at or below the 10th percentile in word reading, reading comprehension or spelling. 

The school must monitor a student’s needs and programme over time to identify
that the student has significant and persistent literacy difficulties.

###  Students with multiple and persistent needs

A student who has at least reached second class and meets all of the following
conditions can get an exemption:

  * The student has a high level of significant, multiple and persistent needs that affect their learning and participation in school life 
  * The student's school has substantial written evidence that the student's needs persist despite a Student Support Plan which has been implemented for at least 2 years 
  * The student has been given every reasonable opportunity to learn Irish in mainstream classes 
  * The principal is satisfied that giving an exemption is in the best interests of the student 

**What are multiple and persistent needs?**

A student has a high level of multiple and persistent needs if their needs are
enduring and severe in nature and significantly affect their daily functioning
at school despite the support of an individualised support programme.

###  Exemption for special schools and special classes in mainstream schools

A student is considered exempt and does not need to apply for a certificate of
exemption if they are:

  * A student in a special school or a special class in a mainstream school 
  * A student who has previously enrolled in a special school or class 
  * A student who is eligible and has been recommended to enrol in a special school or class. 

Your child’s school can make decisions about the Irish language learning needs
of a student in a special class. However, schools are expected to provide
students with opportunities to take part in Irish language and cultural
activities as much as possible.

You can read more about the exemption from Irish in the Department of
Education’s [ FAQ for parents
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/257933/33e14fff-9d78-4af0-9d04-77dd6f1e3611.pdf#page=null)
.

##  How to apply for an exemption from studying Irish

You apply to the school principal for an exemption from studying Irish. You
can get an application form on [ gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/irish-
exemption/)

You should include the reason why you are applying for the exemption. Your
child will only be considered for an exemption if they meet the criteria set
out in the Department of Education circulars on exemption from the study of
Irish - see 'Further information' above.

You must attach documentary evidence of your child's age and previous
schooling if it is relevant to the reason for the exemption.

The school must confirm the outcome of your application, in writing, within 21
working days of getting your application.

You will be issued a certificate of exemption signed by the school principal
if an exemption is granted.

###  Evidence of a disability

Psychological assessments and cognitive ability (IQ) scores are no longer
needed when applying for exemption from the study of Irish.

If the exemption is sought on the grounds of a literacy difficulty, your child
must present with significant and persistent learning difficulties despite
having had access to a differentiated approach to language and literacy
learning over time. The school also must have evidence of your child having a
standardised score at or below the 10th percentile in at least one literacy
attainment test in either word reading, reading comprehension or spelling.

You can read more about the tests the school uses when considering an
applicaion in [ Exemption from the Study of Irish – Guidance on Test Selection
(pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/235577/ce43ee25-8dfb-43a4-a213-f1affb1fa1b6.docx)
.

###  Student Support Plan

The school must keep documentary evidence for students with special
educational needs in the Student Support Plan. The plan should include:

  * Regular reviews of learning needs as part of an ongoing cycle of assessment 
  * Target-setting 
  * Intervention and review including test scores in word reading, reading comprehension, spelling or other scores of language or literacy 

##  How to appeal a decision

If you do not agree with the decision to refuse an exemption for your child,
you can appeal the school’s decision to the Irish Exemptions Appeal Committee
(IEAC) using the [ official appeals form
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/irish-exemption/#appealing-a-decision) . You
must appeal within 30 days from the date you are notified in writing of the
school’s decision.

The Committee will consider the grounds given for the refusal using the
Department’s criteria for exemption and any supporting documentation the
school had at the time of the decision.

You can get more information and an Irish exemption appeal form to appeal the
decision on [ gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/irish-exemption/)

You can reapply for an exemption if it was refused. You should discuss with
the school if it has the correct evidence to support your application.

##  Irish language requirements for third-level courses

**Exemption from Irish at school**

Some third-level courses require a student to have a certain mark in Irish at
the Leaving Certificate examination. If you have been exempted from Irish at
school, you may be exempted from the third level requirement for a course.
However, this is a matter for each individual college.

If you want to do a particular course, you should check with the college that
it allows exemptions from Irish for the course you want to apply for. You can
also check the [ CAO website ](https://www.cao.ie/) for information about
language exemptions.

If you are applying for a third-level course through the Central Applications
Office (CAO), you should send a copy of the exemption certificate with your
CAO application form.

**Exemption from Irish at third-level**

If you didn’t get an exemption from Irish in school under the rules set by the
Department of Education, you can still apply to the third-level institute for
an exemption from Irish in their entry level requirements. The third-level
institute will decide on your application.

The college may also ask you to complete an exemption application form and to
submit supporting documentation. You should check with the individual college
for details on how to apply for an exemption.

_**Page edited:** 31 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/exemption-from-irish/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Exemption%20from%20studying%20Irish&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/exemption-from-irish/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/exemption-from-irish/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Exemption%20from%20studying%20Irish&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/exemption-from-irish/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _PPS numbers for returning Irish emigrants and their families_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-and-families/)

Find your existing PPS number or apply for a new PPS number when returning
home to Ireland. You can also apply for a PPS number for a child born abroad.

1340.2555

  * [ _Artists' exemption from income tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/artists-exemption-from-income-tax/)

Some income earned by artists, writers, sculptors and painters in Ireland from
the sale of their work may be exempt from income tax. How to obtain exemption
from income tax if you are an artist and satisfy certain criteria.

1208.3461

  * [ _Exemptions from Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax-exemptions/)

The Local Property Tax is a tax payable on residential property. This document
gives information about properties that are exempt from the tax.

1189.2205

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

