**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Case study: Public holiday entitlement

#  Case study: Public holiday entitlement

  * Introduction 

##  Introduction

Daniel has been working part-time since June. He works from Tuesday to
Saturday each week from 6pm to 9pm. The other staff who are all full-time had
a day off when the shop was closed for the public holiday in August. Daniel
found out that they were paid for this public holiday and they told him he
should also be paid for that day. He asked his employer about this but the
employer told him since he never worked on a Monday, he had no right be paid
for this public holiday. Who is correct?

**Answer**

Daniel's employer is wrong. Before the August public holiday, Daniel had
worked in the shop for 15 hours a week for 7 weeks which came to a total of
105 hours. This meant he was entitled to public holiday leave under the [
Organisation of Working Time Act 1997.
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0020/index.html) As he was
not due to work on the day of the public holiday, he is entitled to one-fifth
of his normal weekly pay. Daniel should therefore receive an extra 3 hours'
pay.

_**Page edited:** 10 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-public-holiday-
entitlement/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Case%20study%3A%20Public%20holiday%20entitlement&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-public-holiday-
entitlement/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-public-holiday-
entitlement/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Case%20study%3A%20Public%20holiday%20entitlement&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-public-holiday-
entitlement/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Public holidays_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-holidays/)

This gives a list of the ten public holidays and describes your entitlement to
paid time off for these.

2721.9624

  * [ _Case study: Jobseekerâ€™s Benefit and systematic short time work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-work/)

This is a case study showing you how to calculate the length of time a
systematic short time worker can get Jobseeker's Benefit.

1966.3943

  * [ _Case Study: How income from work affects Jobseeker's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-1-how-income-from-employment-affects-jobseeker-s-allowance/)

Income from work affects your Jobseeker's Allowance payment. This case study
shows how work can affect this payment.

1913.852

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

