**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment and disability ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/) > Work
and Access - Workplace Equipment Grant

#  Work and Access - Workplace Equipment Grant

  * What is Work and Access? 
  * What is the Workplace Equipment Grant? 
  * Who can apply? 
  * What can you use the grant for? 
  * How much is the grant? 
  * How to apply 
  * Buying the equipment and ownership 
  * More information 

##  What is Work and Access?

[ Work and Access
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/) is a scheme to support inclusive
employment by offering funding to adjust workplaces and make them more
accessible for people with disabilities.

Funding is available to qualifying job candidates, employees, self-employed
people, and employers.

There are 7 categories of Work and Access support:

  * [ Workplace Needs Assessment ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-grant/)
  * [ Communication Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-communication-support-grant/)
  * [ In-Work Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-grant/)
  * [ Personal Reader ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/personal-reader-grant/)
  * Work Equipment 
  * [ Workplace Adaptation ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)
  * [ Disability Equality and Inclusion Training ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/disability-equality-and-inclusion-training-grant/)

This page explains the Workplace Equipment Grant. Depending on your needs, you
may be entitled to more than one support at the same time. Check the [ Work
and Access Programme
](https://control.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/) details in full before you apply for
any support.

##  What is the Workplace Equipment Grant?

The Workplace Equipment Grant helps people with disabilities by providing up
to €12,000 for assistive equipment or technology.

The grant is available to employees and self-employed people who need specific
tools to do their jobs effectively in the workplace or from home.

##  Who can apply?

New or existing employees and self-employed people can apply for funding. You
can make the application yourself or someone else can apply on your behalf.

###  **How to qualify**

To qualify for the grant, you must have a disability or health condition that
requires assistive equipment or technology to do your job. You must also meet
the [ general eligibility criteria
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/#3f40fb) for the Work and Access
programme.

A workplace needs assessment may be needed, for example, if the cost of the
equipment is high.

##  What can you use the grant for?

You can use the grant to cover the costs of assistive equipment or technology
that helps you do your job. The grant can be for equipment used in a
traditional business setting or for remote working, such as your home office.

Examples of eligible equipment are:

  * Specialised furniture 
  * Alternative keyboards 
  * Screen magnifiers 
  * Induction loop systems 
  * Amplifiers for telephones 
  * Sip and puff systems 
  * Real-time captioning systems 
  * Screen-reading, dictation or voice recognition software 
  * Licence renewal of assistive software 

You can also use the grant for training on how to use the equipment if needed.

Make sure that assistive technology is compatible with workplace devices or
systems before you buy.

###  **What the grant cannot be used for**

The grant cannot be used to:

  * Buy equipment required by law, such as health and safety equipment. 
  * Cover the usual costs of setting up or running a business. 
  * Buy job-specific equipment typically provided by employers. 

##  How much is the grant?

The maximum grant amount is €12,000.

Adaptations to equipment are funded under the Workplace Adaptation Grant,
which is another support under the Work and Access scheme.

##  How to apply

The Department of Social Protection is developing an online application
process, which will be available soon.

To apply for any of the supports available through the Work and Access
Programme, follow these steps:

###  **Step 1: Complete the application form**

  * Request the [ WA1 form ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/297281/a9af4dab-6229-4c76-87a2-4bb3dfbfef2d.pdf#page=null) from your local Intreo Office or download it from gov.ie. 
  * If you are unsure about the support needed, you only complete the relevant section on the WA1 Form. 
  * Provide quotes to support your application (see Quotes in Appendix 6 of the Operational Guidelines). 

###  **Step 2: Eligibility check**

  * Send your completed WA1 Form by post to Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 
  * Your eligibility will be checked by the Work and Access Section 

###  **Step 3: Assessment and approval**

  * An officer will contact you directly to discuss your application. 
  * If eligible, you will be told about the next steps and any additional sections of the application form to complete. 
  * Approval for eligibility does not guarantee funding. 
  * Final approval will be made after you meet specific requirements set by Department officers. 

##  Buying the equipment and ownership

###  **Buying the equipment**

Once your application for the Workplace Equipment Grant is approved, you can
begin purchasing the necessary equipment or technology.

  * The approved equipment or technology must be sourced and purchased by your employer or a designated representative. They will be responsible for buying the specific items that have been approved for funding. 
  * Your employer can claim reimbursement for the costs up to the amount approved in your grant. In some cases, arrangements can be made for direct payment to the equipment provider. 
  * If the equipment requires specialist training for its use, the costs for this training can also be covered by the grant. 

###  **Ownership of the equipment**

The person with the disability who benefits from the equipment keeps ownership
of it. This means the equipment is yours to keep and use, even if you change
jobs or work environments unless it has been integrated into your employer’s
general equipment.

While you own the equipment, your employer may be responsible for its
insurance, maintenance, and any necessary health and safety training related
to its use while you are employed with them.

##  More information

For more information about the Work and Access programme:

  * Read the Department of Social Protection [ Operational Guidelines for the Work and Access Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/429d6-operational-guidelines-work-and-access/)
  * Visit your local Intreo Centre 
  * Email: [ WorkandAccess@welfare.ie ](mailto:workandaccess@welfare.ie)
  * Write to: Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 

_**Page edited:** 26 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20Workplace%20Equipment%20Grant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20Workplace%20Equipment%20Grant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Adaptation Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)

The Workplace Adaptation Grant is is part of the new Work and Access
employment programme, designed to help people with disabilities find or keep a
job by removing or reducing workplace barriers.

3137.2893

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Needs Assessment Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-grant/)

The Workplace Needs Assessment Grant is part of the new Work and Access
employment programme, designed to help people with disabilities to find or
keep a job by removing or reducing workplace barriers.

3073.8186

  * [ _Work and Access - In-Work Support Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-grant/)

The In-Work Support Grantis part of the new Work and Access employment
programme, designed to help people with disabilities to find or keep a job by
removing or reducing workplace barriers.

2188.5293

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

