**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Farming and managing land ](/en/environment/land/) > Farming grants and
schemes

#  Farming grants and schemes

  * Introduction 
  * Pillar 1 – Direct payments and market measures 
  * Pillar 2 – Rural development 
  * Grants for forestry 
  * Grants for buildings and structures 
  * Other grants and schemes 

##  Introduction

If you are a farmer, there are a number of grants and schemes available to
you. For example, there are payments to subsidise your income and grants to
help modernise your farm and make it more sustainable.

Most schemes have their own qualifying criteria and application process.
However, you can apply for some of the schemes when [ applying for BISS
](/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-for-sustainability-scheme-for-
farmers/) , which is the main income subsidy for farmers.

Some of the schemes may be closed to new applicants, but it is important that
you know the terms and conditions of any scheme you are claiming to make sure
you are following the scheme rules.

Most schemes for farmers in Ireland come from the Common Agricultural Policy
(CAP) for all EU countries.

However, there are some separate schemes and grants that are helpful for
farmers, including certain schemes that encourage farmers develop forests.

###  **What is the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)?**

The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is a policy for all EU countries which
includes key objectives for farmers. These include things like:

  * Ensuring a fair income for farmers 
  * Preserving landscapes and biodiversity 
  * Increasing competitiveness in farming 
  * Supporting generational renewal 
  * Protecting food and health quality 
  * Fostering knowledge and innovation 
  * Caring for the environment and meeting climate change goals 

Ireland has a [ CAP Strategic Plan
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/76026-common-agricultural-policy-cap-
post-2020/) which runs from 2023-2027. This plan explains how CAP works in
Ireland and what schemes are available to farmers.

Under this plan, the schemes are divided into 2 different pillars:

  * Pillar 1: Direct payments and market measures 
  * Pillar 2: Rural development including the Targeted Agriculture Modernisation Schemes 3 (TAMS 3) 

##  Pillar 1 – Direct payments and market measures

Direct payments give farmers financial support to subsidise their farming
income and provide a safety net for them if there are market issues. They
include:

  * [ Basic Income Support for Sustainability (BISS) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-for-sustainability-scheme-for-farmers/)
  * [ Complementary Income Support for Young Farmers (CIS-YF) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/38d46-complementary-income-support-for-young-farmers/)
  * [ Complementary Redistributive Income Support for Sustainability (CRISS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/b4290-complementary-redistributive-income-support-for-sustainability-criss/)
  * [ Eco Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e5ed0-eco-scheme/)
  * [ National Apiculture Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9e1ff-beekeeping-honey/#national-apiculture-programme)
  * National Reserve: [ Young Farmer category ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/bb30b-national-reserve-young-farmer-category/) and [ New Farmer category ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5b7788-national-reserve-new-entrant-category/)
  * [ Protein Aid Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/a6ed7f-protein-aid-scheme/)
  * [ Sectoral Intervention in the Fruit and Vegetables Sector ](https://capnetworkireland.eu/schemes/sectoral-intervention-in-the-fruit-and-vegetables-sector/)

##  Pillar 2 – Rural development

These schemes help support rural development by providing grants for:

  * Modernising and improving farms 
  * Farming sustainably 
  * Protecting the environment 

They include:

  * [ Agri-Climate Rural Environment Scheme (ACRES) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/f5a48-agri-climate-rural-environment-scheme-acres/#acres-terms-and-conditions%20)
  * [ Areas of Natural Constraints (ANC) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/13d971-areas-of-natural-constraint-scheme/)
  * [ Collaborative Farming Grant ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/cdd0f8-conditions-of-the-collaborative-farming-grant-scheme/)
  * [ Early Stage Support for Producer Organisations ](https://capnetworkireland.eu/schemes/early-stage-support-for-producer-organisations/)
  * [ Knowledge Transfer Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/63087-knowledge-transfer-programme-2024-2026/)
  * [ National Dairy Beef Welfare Scheme ](https://capnetworkireland.eu/schemes/national-dairy-beef-welfare-scheme/)
  * [ Organic Farming Scheme ](/en/environment/land/organic-farming-scheme/)
  * [ Sheep Improvement Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/98a53-sheep-improvement-scheme/)
  * [ Straw Incorporation Measure ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/86bd1-straw-incorporation-measure-sim/) and [ Bailing Assistance Payment (BAP) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/6f355-bailing-assistance-payment-bap-2024/)
  * [ Suckler Carbon Efficiency Programme (SCEP) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/413bc-suckler-carbon-efficiency-programme-scep/)

**Targeted Agriculture Modernisation Schemes (TAMS 3)**

TAMS 3 are a set of schemes which help farmers get supports to build and
improve farm buildings and equipment. These come under the Pillar 2 CAP
schemes. TAMS 3 follows on from TAMS 1 and TAMS 2.

  * [ Animal Welfare and Nutrient Storage Scheme (AWNSS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/321fc-animal-welfare-and-nutrient-storage-scheme/)
  * [ Dairy Equipment Scheme (DES) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/a050b-dairy-equipment-scheme/)
  * [ Farm Safety Capital Investment Scheme (FSCIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/4f3ae-farm-safety-capital-investment-scheme/)
  * [ Low Emission Slurry Spreading Scheme (LESS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/7342f-low-emission-slurry-spreading-scheme/)
  * [ Nutrient Importation Storage Scheme (NISS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d3cf8-nutrient-importation-storage-scheme/)
  * [ Organic Capital Investment Scheme (OCIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d7556-organic-capital-investment-scheme/)
  * [ Pig and Poultry Investment Scheme (PPIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/989d0-pig-and-poultry-investment-scheme/)
  * [ Solar Capital Investment Scheme (SCIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/6ab0f-solar-capital-investment-scheme/)
  * [ Tillage Capital Investment Scheme (TCIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/2ca8b-tillage-capital-investment-scheme/)
  * [ Women Farmer Capital Investment Scheme (WFCIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/14a7b-women-farmer-capital-investment-scheme/)
  * [ Young Farmer Capital Investment Scheme (YFCIS) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/9b5da-young-farmer-capital-investment-scheme/)

##  Grants for forestry

###  **Grants for creating new forests**

  * [ Afforestation Scheme ](/en/environment/land/afforestation-scheme/)
  * [ Native Tree Area Scheme ](/en/environment/land/native-tree-area-scheme/)

###  **Grants for existing forestry owners**

  * [ Deer Tree Shelter, Hare and Deer Fencing Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/36f02-deer-tree-shelter-hare-and-deer-fencing-scheme/)
  * [ Forestry Knowledge Transfer Group Scheme 2023 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/317e0-forestry-knowledge-transfer-group-scheme-2023/)
  * [ Forest Road Scheme 2023 – 2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9d223-forest-road-scheme-2023-2027/)
  * [ Innovative Forest Technology Scheme – Module 2: Investment Aid for the Development of the Forest Tree Nursery Sector 2023-2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/2d474-innovative-forest-technology-scheme-module-2-investment-aid-for-the-development-of-the-forest-tree-nursery-sector-2023-2027/)
  * [ Native Woodland Conservation Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/b54d3-native-woodland-conservation-scheme/)
  * [ Reconstitution Ash Dieback Scheme 2023 – 2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/15355-reconstitution-ash-dieback-scheme-2023-2027/)
  * [ Woodland Improvement Scheme 2023 – 2027 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/56cc6-woodland-improvement-scheme-2023-2027/)

##  Grants for buildings and structures

  * [ Traditional Farm Buildings Grant Scheme ](https://www.heritagecouncil.ie/projects/traditional-farm-buildings-grant-scheme)
  * [ Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/vacant-property-refurbishment-grant/)

##  Other grants and schemes

  * [ Fodder Transport Support Measure ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/8bf68-fodder-transport-measure/)
  * [ Red Clover Silage Measure ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/ae169-red-clover-silage-measure/)
  * [ Succession Planning Advice Grant ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/a2a29-succession-planning-advice-grant/)
  * [ Tillage Incentive Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/28bbb-tillage-incentive-scheme/)

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
grants-and-schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Farming%20grants%20and%20schemes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
grants-and-schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
grants-and-schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Farming%20grants%20and%20schemes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/farming-
grants-and-schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Farming education, grants and supports_ ](/en/environment/land/farming-education-grants-and-supports/)

There are a number of farming courses and farm apprenticeships, if you want to
become a farmer or upskill in a specific area of farming. There are also
grants to help cover some of the costs of these courses.

1692.6793

  * [ _Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)

Overview of the employment schemes and other supports which encourage people
getting unemployment and certain other social welfare payments to take up
employment.

1312.7896

  * [ _Work and Access - Personal Reader Grants_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/personal-reader-grant/)

You can apply for the Personal Reader grant if you are blind or visually
impaired and need extra help with reading at work.

1069.5312

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

