**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Pay and employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/) > Tips, gratuities and service charges

#  Tips, gratuities and service charges

  * What are tips, gratuities and service charges? 
  * Rules on tips and gratuities and service charges 
  * How tips or gratuities must be distributed 
  * Display of tips and gratuities notice 
  * How the rules are enforced 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * More information 

##  What are tips, gratuities and service charges?

Tipping is mainly associated with the hospitality sector. It is also common in
other services like taxi drivers, hairdressers, tour guides and delivery
drivers.

###  What is a tip or gratuity?

A ‘tip or gratuity’ is a payment made by a customer that they assumed would be
kept by the employee or shared with other employees.

It is either:

  * Voluntarily made to, or left for an employee or group of employees 
  * Voluntarily made to an employer 

###  What is a mandatory service charge?

A ‘mandatory service charge’ is a payment that a customer must pay for certain
goods or services, in addition to the cost of the goods or services.

This could include, for example, cover charge, table charge or corkage.

###  Methods of tipping

Employees usually get tips from customers through one of the following
payments:

  * Mandatory service charge 
  * Discretionary service charge 
  * Tip or gratuity paid to the employer by credit or debit card 
  * Tip or gratuity paid into a communal pool, for example, a staff box or similar 
  * Tip or gratuity handed directly to the employee 

###  Rules on tips and gratuities

The [ Payment of Wages (Amendment) (Tips and Gratuities) Act 2022
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/23/enacted/en/html) introduced
new rules about how employers share tips, gratuities, and service charges
among employees - see more below.

##  Rules on tips and gratuities and service charges

The [ Payment of Wages (Amendment) (Tips and Gratuities) Act 2022
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/23/enacted/en/html) came into
effect on 1 December 2022.

The Act, introduced new rules about how employers share tips, gratuities and
service charges amongst employees. It also made it illegal for employers to
use tips or gratuities to make up basic wages.

The legislation will be reviewed after one year to assess its effectiveness
and decide if further measures are needed.

###  **Sectors covered**

The legislation covers service areas where tipping is common, including
tourism, hospitality, hairdressing, taxi, and delivery services.

It applies to employees in services such as restaurants, pubs, hotels,
guesthouses, tour companies, beauty salons and bookmakers.

###  Restrictions on ‘service charges’

Voluntary service charges are the same as a tip or a gratuity. Mandatory
service charges are charges that must be paid by the customer, on top of the
cost of the product or service.

Employers are banned from describing a mandatory service charge applied to a
customer’s bill as a 'service charge' unless the payment is treated by the
employer in the same way as electronic tips or gratuities.

This means that mandatory service charges can only be added to a bill if the
money goes to employees.

##  How tips or gratuities must be distributed

###  Policy on how tips or gratuities will be distributed

All employees must be consulted on the policy introduced on how tips or
gratuities will be distributed. Employers must also consult with employees
before making a material change to the policy.

###  Distribution of card or smart phone tips

Electronic tips received by the employer must be distributed fairly and in a
transparent way.

Electronic tips include tips paid by:

  * Debit or credit card 
  * Smart card 
  * Cashless or contactless tipping apps or platforms 
  * ‘Push notification’ apps 

Employers can consider certain factors when deciding how to distribute tips,
including:

  * Seniority or experience 
  * The value of sales or revenue generated 
  * The number of hours worked 
  * Whether the worker is on a full-time or part-time contract 
  * The worker’s role in service delivery 

Your employer must give you a statement of the tips and gratuities
distributed, including the total amount of electronic tips received during a
particular period and how much was paid to you. You must get this statement
within 10 days of the tips and gratuities being distributed.

###  Distribution of cash tips

Cash tips are usually paid directly to the worker.

If tips are managed by employees themselves, for example under a ‘tronc’
system, the distribution rules above do not apply.

However, employers must set out how cash tips are distributed in its publicly
displayed Tips and Gratuities Notice’ – see below.

##  Display of tips and gratuities notice

Customers have the right to know what service charges are used for and who
they go to.

Since 1 December 2022, employers must clearly display their policy on how cash
and card tips, gratuities and service charges are distributed.

The tips and gratuities notice must clearly state:

  * Whether or not tips or gratuities are distributed to and among staff 
  * The way they are distributed and the amounts distributed 
  * Whether or not service charges (or any portion of them) are distributed and if so, how they are distributed and the amounts distributed 

You can see a sample tips and gratuities notice in Appendix 1 of the Workplace
Relations Commission (WRC) [ Information Guide to the Payment of Wages
(Amendment) (Tips and Gratuities) Act 2022 (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-
wages/tips-and-gratuities/payment-of-wages-amendment-tips-and-gratuities-
act-2022-information-guide-wrc.pdf) .

##  How the rules are enforced

All electronic tips received by the employer must be distributed fairly and in
a transparent way.

This will be inspected through the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC).

Businesses found breaching the rules can get on-the-spot fines of:

  * €1,500 for not providing employees with their terms of employment or giving false information 
  * €750 for not giving employees a written statement about how tips and gratuities are distributed 
  * €750 for not treating a service charge as a tip 
  * €500 for not displaying a tips and gratuities notice or a contract workers tips and gratuities notice. 

The WRC can order an employer to reimburse any unlawful tip or gratuity
deductions.

##  How to make a complaint

If you are not getting the tips you are due, you should speak with your
employer first.

If you cannot resolve the problem with your employer, you can make a formal
complaint to the WRC.

You must make your complaint using the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/complaints_disputes/refer_a_dispute_make_a_complaint/)
within 6 months of the dispute or complaint occurring. This time limit may be
extended for a further 6 months, but only where there is a reasonable cause
which prevented you from bringing the complaint within the normal time limit.

Read more about [ how to make a complaint ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/adjudication-employment-rights-disputes-and-complaints/) , including
details of the WRC adjudication process.

##  More information

You can get more information from the Workplace Relations Commission’s [
Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) .

The WRC has an [ Information Guide to the Payment of Wages (Amendment) (Tips
and Gratuities) Act 2022 (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/hours-and-
wages/tips-and-gratuities/payment-of-wages-amendment-tips-and-gratuities-
act-2022-information-guide-wrc.pdf) .

_**Page edited:** 2 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/tips-gratuities-service-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tips%2C%20gratuities%20and%20service%20charges&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/tips-gratuities-service-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/tips-gratuities-service-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tips%2C%20gratuities%20and%20service%20charges&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/tips-gratuities-service-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Charges for hospital services_ ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/hospital-charges/)

Charges that patients may have to pay for out-patient and in-patient services
in public hospitals. Also describes long stay charges.

1315.271

  * [ _Applying for social welfare payments and services online_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

1133.6758

  * [ _Community Welfare Service and payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/community-welfare-services-and-payments/)

Community Welfare Officers (CWOs) are responsible for the day to day
administration of the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme. Find out about
their role and responsibilities.

1087.5149

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

