**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Unpaid leave for medical care

#  Unpaid leave for medical care

  * What is unpaid leave for medical care? 
  * How long is the leave? 
  * Who can apply? 
  * What serious medical care is covered? 
  * Do I need to give notice? 
  * How to apply 
  * Protection of your employment rights 
  * Having problems taking leave for medical care 
  * More information from the WRC 

##  What is unpaid leave for medical care?

Unpaid leave for medical care was introduced on 3 July 2023.

It gives you 5 days unpaid leave if you need to take time off work to deal
with serious medical care for a child or other relevant person like a family
member. The leave is available to both parents and carers – see ‘Who can
apply?’ below.

You don’t have to give your employer notice to take the leave in emergency
circumstances. You should give notice if it’s possible to.

The law covering leave for medical care is the [ Work Life Balance and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2023.
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2023/act/8/enacted/en/print.html)

Unpaid leave for medical care is different to [ force majeure leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-work/#48e41d) , which is
paid leave for an urgent family crisis.

##  How long is the leave?

You have a right to 5 days leave for medical care in any 12 consecutive
months. This is the _statutory entitlement_ (that means the legal minimum).

You don’t need to take the leave all at once. It can be taken as single or
multiple days.

###  **Leave for less than a day**

The leave cannot be taken in periods of less than one day.

If you take a half day’s leave, for example, it is still counted as one day.

##  Who can apply?

You can apply for the leave to care or support your:

  * Child (including an adopted child) 
  * Spouse or civil partner 
  * Cohabitant 
  * Parent or grandparent 
  * Brother or sister 
  * Housemate (any other person to those listed above who lives in the same house as you) 

The person must need significant care or support for a serious medical reason.

You do not need any minimum service with your employer to take this leave.

##  What serious medical care is covered?

The sick person must need significant care or support for a _serious medical
reason_ .

Serious medical reason is not defined in the Act.

Your employer can request relevant evidence of the medical need for the leave.

Relevant evidence is either:

  * A medical certificate signed by a doctor 
  * Other evidence the employer may reasonably require 

The medical cert does not need to state the nature of the medical condition.
It only needs to be a statement of fact that the person is, or was, in need of
significant care or support for a serious medical reason.

##  Do I need to give notice?

You don’t have to give your employer notice to take the leave in emergency
circumstances.

You should give notice if it’s possible to.

##  How to apply

You must give confirmation to your employer in writing that you want to apply
for (or have already taken) the leave. You should do this as soon as
reasonably practical. You must also sign this confirmation.

Your signed confirmation must contain:

  * The start date 
  * Length of the leave 
  * A statement of fact (explaining why you are entitled to the leave). 

Your employer must keep the confirmation document and give you a written
acknowledgment that they received the confirmation.

###  **What information do I need to give?**

Your employer can request information relating to:

  * Your relationship with the person being cared for 
  * The nature of that care 
  * Relevant evidence stating that the person named is, or was, in need of significant care or support for a serious medical reason 

See ‘What serious medical care is covered?’ above for more information about
what counts as _relevant evidence_ .

##  Protection of your employment rights

In general, you will be treated as if you are in work during leave for medical
care. This means:

  * You are entitled to return to work in the job you held immediately before you started the leave 
  * You don’t count your time on leave as breaking your continuous service 
  * You must not be dismissed for taking or asking to take the leave 
  * You must not be [ victimised ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement_and_redress/victimisation_at_work.en.html) for taking or asking to take leave for medical care. Your employer cannot penalise or treat you unfairly by, for example, giving you worse conditions of employment or selecting you for redundancy. 

###  **If I take leave for medical care while on probation**

Your employer can suspend your probation, training or apprenticeship for the
period you are on leave for medical care. The days can be added onto the end
of your probation, training or apprenticeship period.

##  Having problems taking leave for medical care

If you have a complaint or dispute with your employer over leave for medical
care, you should raise it with your employer first.

If you cannot resolve the issue directly with your employer, you can make a
formal complaint to the [ Workplace Relations Commission (WRC)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/) .

**How to make a complaint to the WRC**

If you have a dispute with your employer about leave for medical care, or face
[ unfair dismissal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment_and_redundancy/dismissal/unfair_dismissal.en.html)
over your right to the leave, you can [ make a complaint to the WRC online
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

You should make your complaint within 6 months of the dispute taking place.
The time limit may be extended for up to a further 6 months, if there was
reasonable cause for the delay.

##  More information from the WRC

You can get more information from the Workplace Relations Commission's [
Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 11 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Unpaid%20leave%20for%20medical%20care&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Unpaid%20leave%20for%20medical%20care&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Checklist when applying for carer's leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/checklist-when-applying-for-carers-leave/)

Describes the different procedures involved when you are applying for carer's
leave.

2180.082

  * [ _Medical Care Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/medical-care-scheme/)

If you are an insured employee and are injured at work or contract a
prescribed occupational disease you may be entitled to a refund of medical
costs.

1829.2236

  * [ _Carer's leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/)

The Carers Leave Act 2001 allows employees to take unpaid time off work to
provide full-time care for people that require this care.

1781.9069

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

