**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Attendance and discipline in schools
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-
in-schools/) > Bullying in schools

#  Bullying in schools

  * What is bullying? 
  * Cyberbullying 
  * How do I know if my child is being bullied? 
  * What can I do if my child is a bully? 
  * How is bullying stopped? 
  * Where to get help 

##  What is bullying?

Bullying is unwanted negative behaviour (verbal, psychological, or physical),
conducted by an individual or group against another person (or persons), and
which is repeated over time.

If someone posts a once-off offensive or hurtful public message, image, or
statement on a social network site (or another public forum) where that
message, image, or statement can be viewed or repeated by other people, this
is also bullying behaviour.

##  Cyberbullying

Cyberbullying is bullying through the internet or mobile phone, often through
social networking sites.

This means a person can be cyberbullied whenever they are online, even when in
their own home. Because it happens on the internet, it is difficult to
prevent.

###  **How to deal with cyberbullying**

For information about how to deal with cyberbullying, you can:

  * Read [ Get With It! A guide to cyberbullying (pdf) ](https://www.hotline.ie/library/documents/Cyberbullying.pdf) , including how to identify cyberbullying and how to prevent it 
  * Visit the [ Be Safe Online hub ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/be-safe-online/) on Gov.ie for a range of online safety resources, including [ information on online bullying ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/be-safe-online/#:~:text=play%20their%20part.-,ONLINE%20BULLYING,-Advice%20for%20parents)
  * See [ guidance for parents on dealing with cyberbullying ](https://www.webwise.ie/parents/cyberbullying-advice/) on Webwise.ie 
  * Read our page about [ how to keep your child safe online ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/buying-digital-content-and-services/online-safety/#856a1f) . 

##  How do I know if my child is being bullied?

Many children who are being bullied are afraid to speak out. They may be
worried that telling someone will make the bullying worse.

Reports have shown that as young people grow older, they are less likely to
tell someone. They become more and more isolated, experience depression and,
in extreme cases, can harm themselves or attempt suicide.

###  Signs of bullying

Tusla and Barnardos have a booklet about [ coping with bullying for parents of
children between 6 and 12 (pdf)
](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/Parents_Coping_with_Bullying_d3.pdf) .

It says signs of bullying can include:

  * Fear of going to school 
  * Poor or deteriorating schoolwork, or an inability to concentrate 
  * Withdrawn behaviour 
  * Depression 
  * Loss of confidence 
  * Reluctance to go out 
  * Shortage of money 
  * Torn clothes, broken glasses, missing schoolbooks 
  * Repeated signs of bruising and injuries 

##  What can I do if my child is a bully?

If you think your child might be a bully, it is important to recognise this
and help them to deal with it. You should talk to the class teacher about this
bullying behaviour and how it could be changed.

If you are told that your child might be bullying somebody, it is important to
react appropriately. Try not to immediately dismiss the allegation, nor
immediately punish your child.

Instead, you should establish the facts of what happened and, if bullying has
occurred, work with the teacher to:

  * Show your child the consequences of their actions, and 
  * Hold them accountable for their behaviour. 

You can read Tusla’s guidance on [ what to do if you suspect your child is a
bully ](https://www.tusla.ie/parenting-24-seven/12-years/name-it-and-tame-
it/bullying/#:~:text=WHAT%20TO%20DO%20IF%20YOU%20SUSPECT%20YOUR%20CHILD%20IS%20A%20BULLY%C2%A0)
.

##  How is bullying stopped?

If a child is being bullied at school, adult intervention is usually needed.
Bullying must be challenged or it will become regular and get worse.

If you think your child is being bullied at school, you should first talk to
the class teacher or school principal.

School authorities are responsible for dealing with bullying. All schools
should have an anti-bullying policy as part of their overall code of
behaviour.

###  **Anti-bullying initiatives for schools**

The Department of Education has published a new anti-bullying strategy, [
Cineáltas: Action Plan on Bullying (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/241000/eb57d761-2963-4ab0-9d16-172b2e3be86d.pdf) , and
an [ implementation plan for 2023-2027.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/52aaf-cinealtas-action-plan-on-
bullying/#cinealtas-implementation-plan-2023-2027)

As part of this strategy, [ new anti-bullying modules
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/e831f-minister-foley-announces-new-anti-
bullying-initiatives-for-schools/) will be taught in primary and post-primary
schools from September 2024. These modules include a first-year resource to
support students moving from primary to post-primary education.

The modules will build on the existing [ FUSE programme
](https://antibullyingcentre.ie/fuse/) , which is currently taught in primary
and post-primary schools, and which covers:

  * Noticing and reporting bullying, and 
  * Dealing with cyberbullying and online conflict. 

###  **If the bullying continues**

If the matter cannot be resolved by the school staff, you can report it to the
Chairperson of the school’s Board of Management. The Board of Management is
legally responsible for the day-to-day running of the school and has a duty of
care to the students.

The Board is instructed by the [ school patron
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-schools/) to carry out
its duties under the Education Act 1998.

###  **Making a complaint**

Whether your child is in primary school or post-primary school, you can get
information on [ how to make a complaint about bullying
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/cb6966-anti-bullying-procedures-for-
primary-and-post-primary-schools/) from the Department of Education. However,
the Department of Education itself does not have any power to investigate
complaints.

The Department’s [ anti-bullying procedures for primary and post-primary
schools (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/24429/3b6f3db2de154ebaa1f69a0856c97c8e.pdf)
are expected [ to be updated in 2024 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/e831f-minister-foley-announces-new-anti-bullying-initiatives-for-
schools/) .

The updated procedures will:

  * Include guidance on when bullying becomes a child protection concern 
  * Ensure proper oversight at school-level 
  * Make sure that schools’ anti-bullying policies are developed in consultation with whole school communities. 

###  **Serious instances of bullying**

Serious instances of bullying, where the behaviour is regarded as possibly
abusive, must be reported to [ Tusla
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/) or [ An Garda
Síochána ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/) .

##  Where to get help

If your child is being bullied at school, you should first [ contact their
school ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/find-a-school/) (see ‘How is bullying
stopped?’ above).

You can also:

  * Read the Department of Education’s [ anti-bullying resources for parents, students, and schools ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/bullying-information-for-parents-and-students/#resources-for-parents-students-and-schools)
  * Find information and resources about bullying on the [ Barnardos ](https://www.barnardos.ie/resources/young-people/bullying/) and [ Tusla ](https://www.tusla.ie/parenting-24-seven/12-years/name-it-and-tame-it/bullying/) websites 
  * Read about [ dealing with cyberbullying ](https://www.webwise.ie/parents/cyberbullying-advice/) on Webwise.ie (see ‘Cyberbullying’ above) 
  * Visit the [ Tackling Bullying website ](https://tacklebullying.ie/additional-support/) for a range of additional support services and resources offering advice on dealing with bullying. 

If your child has experienced serious instances of bullying, where the
behaviour is regarded as possibly abusive, you should report it to [ Tusla
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/) or [ An Garda
Síochána ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/) .

###  Tusla - Child and Family Agency

Brunel Building  
Heuston South Quarter  
Dublin 8  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 771 8500

**Homepage:** [ https://www.tusla.ie/ ](https://www.tusla.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@tusla.ie ](mailto:info@tusla.ie)

###  Garda Síochána

Phoenix Park  
Dublin 8  
D08 HN3X  
Ireland

**Tel:** 01 6660000; Garda Confidential: 1800 666 111

**Homepage:** [ https://www.garda.ie/en/ ](https://www.garda.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 29 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/bullying-in-
schools-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Bullying%20in%20schools&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/bullying-in-
schools-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/bullying-in-
schools-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Bullying%20in%20schools&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/bullying-in-
schools-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1554.0309

  * [ _Inspection of schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/schools-inspectorate/)

The Department of Education is responsible for inspecting and evaluating all
State schools.

1520.9651

  * [ _Special needs education in primary schools_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-schools/)

The arrangements for special needs education in primary schools include
learning support and resource teachers, and special needs assistants.

1469.7303

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

