**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/) > [ Fees and
supports for third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/) > Third-level student fees and
charges

#  Third-level student fees and charges

  * Do I have to pay tuition fees? 
  * Third-level fees 
  * Student contribution 
  * How do I apply for free fees? 

##  Do I have to pay tuition fees?

Most undergraduate students attending publicly funded third-level courses do
not have to pay tuition fees. Under the terms of the [ Free Fees Initiative
](http://www.studentfinance.ie/mp9377/course-fees/index.html) , the Department
of Further and Higher Education pays the fees to the colleges instead.

A separate annual charge is payable to colleges for the costs of student
services and examinations (see ‘Student contribution’ below).

Charges for Post-Leaving Certificate courses (PLCs) operate under different
rules. You can read about [ Post-Leaving Certificate courses
](/en/education/further-education-and-training/post-leaving-certificate-
courses/) .

##  Third-level fees

###  Free fees

To qualify for free fees, you must meet criteria based on:

  * Residence 
  * Nationality and immigration status 
  * Course requirements 

####  **Residence**

You must have been living in an EEA member state or Switzerland or United
Kingdom (UK) **for at least 3 of the 5 years before starting your course** .

The members of the EEA (the European Economic Area) are the member states of
the EU, along with Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein.

####  **Nationality and immigration**

You must also meet **one** of the following criteria as regards nationality
and immigration status in Ireland.

You must be one of the following, or have been granted one of the following:

  * A citizen of an EEA member state (see above), Switzerland or the UK 
  * Have official [ refugee status ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/your-rights-when-you-get-international-protection/)
  * A [ family member of a refugee ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/family-reunification-for-refugees-in-ireland/) and have been granted permission to live in the State 
  * A [ family member of an EU national ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/) and have permission to live in the State, with a stamp “4EUFAM” on your residence card 
  * Have been granted [ humanitarian leave to remain ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/permission-to-remain/) in the State 
  * Have been granted permission to remain in the State by the Minister for Justice, following a determination by the Minister not to make a deportation order under Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1999 
  * Have been granted [ subsidiary protection with permission to reside in the State ](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-performance/funding/student-finance/course-fees/#:~:text=Persons%20Granted%20Subsidiary%20Protection%20with%20Permission%20to%20Reside%20in%20the%20State) by the Minister for Justice 
  * Have been granted [ certain permissions under the International Protection Act 2015 ](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-performance/funding/student-finance/course-fees/#:~:text=in%20the%20State-,International%20Protection%20Act%2C%202015,-The%20following%20categories)

####  **Course requirements**

You must also meet **all** of the following course requirements.

You must be starting a full-time undergraduate course that lasts at least 2
years (or certain shorter courses in institutes of technology).

You must be starting an undergraduate course for the first time. However, you
may also qualify for free fees if you:

  * Already hold a Level 6 or a Level 7 qualification and are progressing to a Level 8 qualification on the [ National Framework of Qualifications ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/the-qualifications-system/national-framework-of-qualifications) , or 
  * Previously attended a course but did not complete it, and are returning to study an approved course at the same level after a break of at least 5 years 

You must not be repeating a year because of failing your exams or changing
course (this may be waived in exceptional circumstances, such as a certified
serious illness).

####  **Eligible institutions and courses**

Free fees arrangements apply to undergraduate courses in:

  * Universities 
  * Institutes of technology 
  * Publicly funded colleges of education 
  * National College of Ireland 
  * A number of religious education institutions 

You cannot get free fees for courses in private colleges, whether they have [
Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI) ](http://www.qqi.ie/) approval or
not. A course being listed by the [ Central Applications Office (CAO)
](http://cao.ie/index.php) does not mean it is a _free fees_ course.

You can get detailed information about assistance with tuition fees [ on the
Higher Education Authority (HEA) website ](https://hea.ie/funding-governance-
performance/funding/student-finance/course-fees/) .

###  EU fees

If you do not qualify for free fees, you may still be eligible for _EU fee
rates_ . EU fee rates are set by each individual third-level educational
institution. You should contact the one you are interested in to find out
about the EU fee rate and whether you qualify.

Some examples of when people might qualify for an EU fee rate include:

  * You originally qualified for free fees and are now **repeating a year** that you failed. 
  * You do not fulfil any of the nationality and immigration status criteria listed above but have been **tax resident** for a number of years in an EEA member state or Switzerland (however, as the third-level institutions are autonomous bodies, this is at the discretion of the institution concerned) 

An Irish, EU, EEA or Swiss student who has spent at least 5 years in primary
school or second-level school in Ireland can avail of EU fee rates.

If you do not qualify for EU fees, you can be charged non-EU fees. Each third-
level educational institution sets its own fee rates. You should contact the
ones you are interested in to find out more about their fees (see 'Where to
apply' below).

##  Student contribution

Most colleges charge an annual student contribution, formerly called the
student services charge. It is also known as a registration fee and it covers
student services and examinations. The amount of the contribution varies from
one institution to another.

The maximum rate of the student contribution for the academic year 2023-2024
was €3,000.

If you are getting [ Back to Education Allowance (BTEA) ](/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/) , you may qualify for
exemption from the student contribution. You can read more about [ social
welfare payments and the student contribution
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-
education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/) .

###  Student grants

Student grants provide financial support to eligible students. Student grants
are divided into:

  * Maintenance grants 
  * Fee grants 

A maintenance grant is a contribution towards your living costs.

A fee grant can cover:

  * All or part of your tuition fees (if you do not qualify for the Free Fees Scheme) 
  * All or part of the student contribution 
  * Costs of essential field trips 

If you have qualified for a maintenance grant, you will generally qualify for
a fee grant.

If you do not qualify for a maintenance grant, but your family’s reckonable
income is below certain limits, you may qualify for a partial fee grant. This
means that you will either be exempt from 50% of the student contribution, or
exempt from 50% of any tuition fees and all of the student contribution.

Read more about the [ Student Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) for full-time
students.

####  **Part-time fee scheme for undergraduate courses**

From August 2024, a part-time fee scheme for students studying specified
undergraduate courses is available. The scheme only offers support with fees
and is not a maintenance grant.

Read more about the [ part-time fee scheme for undergraduate courses
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-courses/) .

###  **Postgraduate fees**

You may get [ financial assistance under the Student Grant Scheme
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/postgraduate-student-grant/) with the cost of tuition fees for
approved postgraduate courses in Ireland and Northern Ireland. You cannot get
support under the Scheme for courses elsewhere in the EU.

###  **Tax relief**

You may be able to claim tax relief on tuition fees that you have paid.
Families who pay student contributions for more than one student in a year can
also claim tax relief on the second and subsequent contributions.

Read more about [ tax relief for third-level fees ](/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-
level-fees/) .

##  How do I apply for free fees?

There is no separate application for the Free Fees Initiative. Your
eligibility will be assessed based on the information you give when applying
for a college place (see ‘Free fees’ above).

For information about fees, contact your chosen [ third-level educational
institution ](http://hea.ie/higher-education-institutions/?v=l) .

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Third-
level%20student%20fees%20and%20charges&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Third-
level%20student%20fees%20and%20charges&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax relief for third-level fees_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)

Tax relief is available in respect of tuition fees paid in private third-level
institutions, in institutions abroad and by repeat students and part-time
students. The Student Contribution may also qualify for relief.

2118.1519

  * [ _Third-level courses and mature students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-students/)

This page describes the different full-time and part-time educational options
available to adults at third level.

1382.1255

  * [ _Tax relief on nursing home fees and for dependent relatives_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-for-dependent-relatives/)

Tax relief is available on fees paid for nursing homes and for dependent
relatives. Information on tax credits and how to apply for tax relief.

1205.766

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

