**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [ Types
of employment ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/) > [ Self-employment
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/) > COVID-19 recovery and
cost of living business supports

#  COVID-19 recovery and cost of living business supports

  * Introduction 
  * Loans, grants and vouchers 
  * Rates waiver and tax measures 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Business owners could avail of a number of supports during COVID-19.

This page summarises some of the financial support schemes, rates waivers and
tax measures in place to support businesses as they continue to recover from
COVID-19 and deal with the rising costs of living.

You can also get advice from your accountant or use the advisory support from
your [ Local Enterprise Office (LEO) ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Find-
Your-Local-Enterprise-Office/) .

You can get up-to-date information on [ support and guidance
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/what-we-do/supports-for-
smes/covid-19-supports/) for businesses and employers from the Department of
Enterprise, Trade and Employment. Or use the online guide [
supportingSMEs.gov.ie ](https://supportingsmes.gov.ie/search-for-supports/) .

##  Loans, grants and vouchers

###  Small Business Cashflow Loans

Small Business Cashflow Loans from €2,000 to €50,000 are available through [
Microfinance Ireland (MFI) ](https://microfinanceireland.ie/cashflow-
loan/?_gl=1*tw1u04*_up*MQ..*_ga*MjAyOTA3NDk3Mi4xNzI1OTU2ODA1*_ga_XL4ZCD4R6E*MTcyNTk1NjgwNC4xLjAuMTcyNTk1NjgwNC4wLjAuMA..)
. The loan terms are typically 3 years and there is a 1% discount on the APR
Rate if you apply through your Local Enterprise Office. Once all documents are
received, you will have a credit decision within 10 working days.

The loan is open to sole traders, partnerships, and limited companies with
fewer than 10 full-time employees and an annual turnover of up to €2 million.
You can [ apply through the MFI website
](https://microfinanceireland.ie/register-your-
interest/?_gl=1*1g4z403*_up*MQ..*_ga*MTQzNzM2MTgyMi4xNzI1OTU3MzY2*_ga_XL4ZCD4R6E*MTcyNTk1NzM2NS4xLjAuMTcyNTk1NzM2NS4wLjAuMA..)
or through your [ Local Enterprise Office
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Find-Your-Local-Enterprise-Office/) .

###  Trading Online Voucher Scheme

A [ Trading Online Voucher Scheme
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/SouthDublin/Financial-Supports/Trading-
Online-Voucher-Scheme/) worth up to €2,500 is available to help small and
microenterprises get online. A second voucher of up to €2,500 is also
available. Contact your [ Local Enterprise Office
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Find-Your-Local-Enterprise-Office/) for more
information and application details.

##  Rates waiver and tax measures

A number of measures are available to help businesses reduce their operational
costs.

###  **Increased Cost of Business (ICOB) grant**

An **Increased Cost of Business (ICOB)** grant to help with business costs,
was announced in [ Budget 2024 ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/budgets/budget-2024/) .

The grant gives businesses back half of what they paid for commercial rates in
2023 if they paid up to €10,000.

Businesses who paid between €10,000 and €30,000 in commercial rates in 2023
get a grant of €5,000.

The grants were available through local authorities. The local authority
contacted eligible businesses directly. If you are in rate arrears engage with
your local authority as you may be eligible for the grant. You get an ID, PIN
number and details of how to register.

The grant opened for registration on 14 March and closed for registration on
29 May 2024.

####  **Second grant payment for retail and hospitality sectors**

Businesses in the retail and hospitality sectors are entitled to a second
payment. If your business is already registered, there is no need to re-
register to get the second grant payment. You will receive another email when
your second grant payment is processed.

Newly-registered businesses in these sectors who qualify are entitled to a
double payment.

###  Ukraine Enterprise Crisis Scheme

The Ukraine Enterprise Crisis Scheme helped viable but vulnerable firms of all
sizes in the manufacturing and internationally traded services sectors.

There are two streams of funding under the Scheme. You could apply under:

  * Stream 1 for grants up to €500,00 to help if you are having trading difficulties caused by liquidity problems as a result of the war in Ukraine. In March 2023 the maximum aid level was increased to 2 million. Stream 1 closed on 31 December 2023. 

  * Stream 2 for state aid support of 30% of energy charges in 2022 if you are an energy intensive company experiencing severe increases in energy costs. In March 2023 the maximum aid level was increased to 4 million. Stream 2 closed on 31 March 2024. 

You can find out more about the scheme through [ Enterprise Ireland
](https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/supports) .

###  ‘Warehousing’ of tax liabilities

Debts that are warehoused are subject to 0% interest for the warehoused
period. The tax debt warehousing scheme [ was further extended
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-office/press-
releases/2022/pr-101822-extension-debt-warehousing-scheme-support-
business.aspx) for some businesses until 1 May 2024.

No interest was payable up to 30 April 2023 on warehoused debt. Businesses
that already paid interest on warehoused debt at 3% will get a refund from
Revenue. Revenue is also offering flexibilities such as payment breaks and
extended payment arrangements on a case-by-case basis.

Businesses had until 1 May 2024 to either:

  * Pay their warehoused debt in full, or 
  * Engage with Revenue to repay the debt through a phased payment arrangement 

Find more information on the Debt Warehousing Scheme from [ Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-business/paying-your-tax/debt-
warehousing/index.aspx) .

###  **Waiving of licence fees for street furniture**

For the remainder of 2024, restaurant and café owners [ do not have to pay
street furniture licence fees ](https://www.gov.ie/en/circular/e33df-circular-
pl-032024-planning-and-development-street-furniture-fees-
regulations-2024-si-196-of-2024/) for tables and chairs used for outdoor
dining.

##  More information

You can use the online guide [ supportingSMEs.gov.ie
](https://supportingsmes.gov.ie/search-for-supports/) for information on the
range of government supports available.

The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment has [ Enterprise Ireland
](https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/) , with information on the Government
supports available to businesses. Call (01) 727 2000, Monday to Friday from
9am to 5pm.

_**Page edited:** 12 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-
supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=COVID-19%20recovery%20and%20cost%20of%20living%20business%20supports&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-
supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-
supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=COVID-19%20recovery%20and%20cost%20of%20living%20business%20supports&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-
supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Help with the cost of living_ ](/en/money-and-tax/cost-of-living/help-with-cost-of-living/)

This page has advice on some of the supports that are available and
information about how you can manage your money.

2114.0134

  * [ _Supports for businesses going green_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/supports-for-businesses-going-green/)

This page summarises the supports available to make your business green,
sustainable and eco-friendly.

1578.3119

  * [ _Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/)

Information about the functions of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators.
This used to be called the Office of the Taxing Master.

1547.3939

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

