**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ State examinations ](/en/education/state-examinations/) > Leaving
Certificate Vocational Programme

#  Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme

  * What is the Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme? 
  * Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme subjects and assessments 
  * Access to further study 
  * Exam fees 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is the Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme?

The Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme (LCVP) is a Leaving Certificate
with a strong vocational focus and is distinct from the [ established Leaving
Certificate ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/) .

The LVCP focusses on developing students' practical skills for the world of
work alongside their academic subjects.

LCVP students must take:

  * 5 established Leaving Certificate subjects including Irish 
  * 2 link modules on enterprise education and preparation for work 

If you are exempt from Irish, you must choose another subject to ensure you
have 5 established Leaving Certificate subjects.

The Department of Education has published the [ assessment arrangements for
Junior Cycle and Senior Cycle examinations in 2025 (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/305305/b1447429-4703-4847-bbe1-a3d97c64fe8d.pdf)
.

You can read information about [ Leaving Certificate ](/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-certificate/) .

##  Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme subjects and assessments

###  The link modules

Students must take 2 link modules:

  * Preparation for the world of work 
  * Enterprise education 

The link modules are activity-based and are taken over the 2 years of the
programme.

The 2 modules usually take a total of 2 to 3 class periods per week, compared
with a Leaving Certificate subject, which generally takes 4 to 5 class periods
in a week.

The link modules help students to apply the knowledge and skills they gain
through their chosen subjects with the world outside the school.

You can read more about the [ programme modules and requirements
](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/997056e3-2792-4ef6-8b6c-ef80c0dfccd8/Revised-
LCVP-Programme-Statement_June-22_EN.pdf)

###  Assessment and examinations

The Leaving Certificate subjects are examined through the standard [ Leaving
Certificate ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/)
examination.

The link modules are assessed by:

  * A written examination representing 40% of total marks 
  * A portfolio of coursework representing 60% of total marks 

###  Certification

Students receive the same certificate as other Leaving Certificate students,
but their Leaving Certificate includes an additional statement of the results
of the link modules (pass, merit or distinction).

##  Access to further study

The Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme (LCVP) gives students the same
opportunity to proceed to universities and colleges as the students taking the
[ established Leaving Certificate ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-
certificate/) .

A new grading scheme for the Leaving Certificate was introduced in 2017. The
new scheme means that the Common Points Scale used by the CAO to determine
entry into higher education institutions, has also been revised.

Since 2017, institutes of technology and the universities recognise the link
modules as follows:

Distinction: 66 points

Merit: 46 points

Pass: 28 points

[ You can read more on transition.ie. ](http://www.transition.ie/)

##  Exam fees

There will be [ no fee for the Leaving Certificate exam in 2024
](https://www.gov.ie/en/speech/65152-statement-by-minster-donohoe-on-
budget-2024/) .

##  How to apply

If you are a post-primary school student, your details will be sent to the
State Examinations Commission (SEC) by your school. If you are an external
(non-school) candidate for the Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme, you
can apply online by completing the [ application form available on the SEC
website ](https://www.examinations.ie/index.php?l=en&mc=ca&sc=ca) .

##  Where to apply

###  State Examinations Commission

Cornamaddy  
Athlone  
Westmeath  
Ireland

**Tel:** (090) 644 2700

**Fax:** (090) 644 2744

**Homepage:** [ http://www.examinations.ie/ ](http://www.examinations.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 11 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Leaving%20Certificate%20Vocational%20Programme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Leaving%20Certificate%20Vocational%20Programme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Leaving Certificate_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/)

Information about the established Leaving Certificate programme.

2113.7905

  * [ _Leaving Certificate 2021 and accredited grades_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-cert-accredited-grades/)

In 2021, Leaving Certificate students had the choice to sit the written
examination or get an accredited grade from the State Examination Commission
(SEC).

2079.8594

  * [ _Post Leaving Certificate (PLC) courses_ ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/)

Post Leaving Certificate (PLC) courses offer a mixture of practical work,
academic work and work experience to school leavers and adult participants.

2012.6014

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

