**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment and disability ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/) >
Supported employment for people with disabilities

#  Supported employment for people with disabilities

  * What is the EmployAbility Service? 
  * Who can use the EmployAbility Service? 
  * What type of supports are provided? 
  * How to find a job 
  * Do I have to pay to use the EmployAbility Service? 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is the EmployAbility Service?

The [ EmployAbility Service ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/8578c4-access-the-
employability-service/) is an employment and recruitment service that helps
people who have a disability, an injury or and an illness to get and to keep a
job. It gives a number of supports, such as a job coach who works with both
jobseekers and employers. It used to be called the Supported Employment
Service.

The EmployAbility Service works through sponsor organisations in local
communities on behalf of the Department of Social Protection(DSP) – see
‘Sponsor organisations’ below.

##  Who can use the EmployAbility Service?

To use the EmployAbility Service, you must be between 18 and 65 and need
support in finding and getting a job.

You must also be _job ready_ . Job ready is having the necessary training,
education, motivation and ability to work.

The service is for people who genuinely need the support of a job coach to get
a job. See ‘What does a job coach do?’ below

##  What type of supports are provided?

EmployAbility Service supports include:

  * Ongoing support for both the employer and employee throughout employment 
  * A professional job-matching service to help ensure successful recruitment 
  * Advice and information on additional employment supports 

**How does it help jobseekers?**

EmployAbility can give you career advice and employment support. Career advice
includes identifying your skills and helping you to search for a job.

**Employment support** includes:

  * Help with applying for jobs 
  * Help with finding jobs 
  * Matching your skills with employers’ needs 
  * Help with fitting into the workplace after you get a job 
  * Advice on employment benefits and entitlements 

**How does it help employers?**

The EmployAbility Service’s supports for employers include:

  * Free recruitment and employment service 
  * Database of skilled jobseekers 
  * Access to a committed, local workforce 
  * Ongoing support from a professional team of job coaches 
  * Advice on employment grants and supports 

**How can a job coach help?**

Job coaches provide support both before and after you get a job. Job coaches
can:

  * Help you to identify your skills, interests and aspirations 
  * Help you to identify suitable employment where your skills, interests and talents match what is needed in the job 
  * Examine the various tasks involved in the job and plan the supports you may need 
  * Help you to develop the technical and social skills needed to do the job 

##  How to find a job

When you and your job coach have identified and agreed on the type of work you
are interested in, the next stage is to apply for jobs.

You can do this either by applying for jobs that are [ advertised in the usual
way ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-
work/finding-and-getting-a-job/) or by your job coach helping you to apply for
jobs in your area. Sometimes, this can involve your job coach contacting
employers in your area or in your chosen field of work.

Job coaches provide continuing support in a number of ways, depending on what
you need. For example, they can help with on-the-job training and can support
you and the employer when you first start a job. Or they can provide support
and advice only when you ask for it.

During a placement, a job coach gives information, advice and ongoing support
to employers. Occasionally, the employer and employee may agree that the job
is not working out. If this happens, the job coach can then step in to assess
the situation and offer more support.

**What are sponsor organisations?**

The EmployAbility Service works through sponsor organisations. These are often
community and voluntary organisations in your local area that provide direct
services to people with disabilities. These [ sponsor organisations
](http://www.gov.ie/en/publication/28d5a6-list-of-employability-
organisations/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/List-of-Employability-
Organisations.aspx) have job coaches who provide supports for jobseekers with
a disability, and for employers.

##  Do I have to pay to use the EmployAbility Service?

Using the EmployAbility Service is free. You do not have to pay for any of the
supports you receive.

When you get a job through this service, you have the same [ employment rights
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-
duties/employee-rights-and-entitlements/) as other employees. For example,
your employer will pay your salary and you will agree the terms and conditions
of employment in the same way as other employees

**What grants and supports are available?**

The DSP funds a range of supports aimed at helping people with a disability to
get and keep a job.

Supports for employers:

  * [ Wage Subsidy Scheme ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/)
  * Employee Retention Grant Scheme 
  * [ Workplace Equipment Adaptation Grant ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)
  * Disability Awareness Training Support Scheme 

Grants for jobseekers:

  * Job Interview Interpreter Grant 
  * [ Personal Reader Grant ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/personal-reader-grant/)
  * [ Workplace Equipment Adaptation Grant ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)

##  How to apply

You should register with your local Intreo centre or Social Welfare branch
office and apply for the EmployAbility Service.

You can read more about [ working with a disability
](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/working-with-a-disability/) .

##  Where to apply

Contact your [ local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/List-of-Social-Welfare-Local-and-Branch-
Offices-by-County.aspx) . You can also contact your [ local EmployAbility
Service ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/List-of-Employability-
Organisations.aspx) directly.

_**Page edited:** 4 August 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Supported%20employment%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Supported%20employment%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of residential services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-care-people-with-disabilities/)

Residential services for people with disabilities must meet certain standards.
The Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) registers and inspects
these services.

2338.3918

  * [ _Wage Subsidy Scheme for people with disabilities_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/)

The Wage Subsidy Scheme (WSS) offers financial support for employers who
employ people with disabilities.

2264.5247

  * [ _Assessment of need for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-disabilites/)

The Disability Act 2005 provides for the Assessment of Need for people with
disabilities. Find out how the assessment is carried out.

2223.6995

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

