**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to primary school ](/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/) > Curriculum in primary
schools

#  Curriculum in primary schools

  * What is the school curriculum? 
  * What do children learn at school? 
  * Further information 

##  What is the school curriculum?

The curriculum sets out the subjects children study in school.

It sets out what your child is taught and how their learning is assessed in
each subject.

Ireland's primary and post-primary school curricula are set by the Minister
for Education who is advised by the [ National Council for Curriculum and
Assessment (NCCA) ](https://ncca.ie/en) .

##  What do children learn at school?

The primary school curriculum consists of 7 curricular areas. Some areas are
further divided into subjects. The 7 areas are:

  * Language: [ Gaeilge (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/920c3fd9-1f53-4163-a045-90f07ebb6b71/PSEC01b-Gaeilge_curriculum.pdf) , [ English (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/5b514700-e65c-46a7-a7d0-c8e05e115bf9/PSEC01a_English_Curriculum.pdf)
  * Mathematics: [ Mathematics ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/Primary/Curriculum-Areas/Mathematics/)
  * Social, Environmental and Scientific Education: [ History (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/4b95f9d8-a307-4ef0-bbf0-b3b9047f31f0/PSEC03a_History_Curriculum.pdf) , [ Geography (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/6e999e7b-556a-4266-9e30-76d98c277436/PSEC03b_Geography_Curriculum.pdf) , [ Science (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/346522bd-f9f6-49ce-9676-49b59fdb5505/PSEC03c_Science_Curriculum.pdf)
  * Arts Education: [ Music (pdf), ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/6d3a3e34-69ed-464e-9d3e-002ab7e47140/PSEC04c_Music_Curriculum.pdf) [ Visual Arts (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/0e0ccff3-97c4-45c8-b813-e7c119a650c3/PSEC04A_Visual_Arts_Curriculum.pdf) , [ Drama (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/f2199a0a-9562-4643-b95f-a2fc272ccf13/PSEC04b_Drama_Curriculum.pdf)
  * Physical Education: [ Physical Education (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/ca8a385c-5455-42b6-9f1c-88390be91afc/PSEC05_Physical-Education_Curriculum.pdf)
  * Social Personal and Health Education: [ Social, Personal and Health Education (pdf) ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/getmedia/462570f8-27cc-4f5b-a13e-d1e2de8c18d2/PSEC06_SPHE_curriculum.pdf)
  * Religious Education is the responsibility of the school patron 

The curriculum aims to provide all children with learning opportunities that
recognise and celebrate their uniqueness and develop their full potential.

The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA) provides [
information for parents ](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/Primary) about the
curriculum. It also provides advice on how you can support your child's
learning at school and at home.

###  Assessment of children in school

An assessment gathers information about how your child learns and what they
learn. The assessment can show how your child is progressing and developing.

Schools must regularly evaluate students and periodically report the results
of the evaluation to students and their parents.

Children's learning and achievements are assessed in primary schools using a
variety of tests and other methods.

All Irish primary schools must carry out three [ standardised tests of
students in English and Mathematics ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/14911/56cab197b2c14c60a222cfdd4219c1ee.doc)
during primary school. They are tested:

  * At the end of first class or at the beginning of second class and 
  * At the end of fourth class 
  * At the beginning of sixth class 

The National Council for Curriculum and Assessment has published [ Assessment
in the Primary School Curriculum: Guidelines for Schools (pdf)
](https://www.ncca.ie/media/1351/assessment-guidelines.pdf) . It has also
published [ explanatory leaflets for parents about the standardised tests
](https://www.ncca.ie/en/primary/resources-for-parents#) .

Students will not be tested in special schools, if the school principal
considers that a student’s disability prevents them from attempting the test.

##  Further information

###  National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA)

ESRI Building  
Whitaker Square  
Sir John Rogerson’s Quay  
Dublin 2  
D02 K138  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 661 7177

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ncca.ie/ ](https://www.ncca.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@ncca.ie ](mailto:info@ncca.ie)

_**Page edited:** 8 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-
curriculum/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Curriculum%20in%20primary%20schools&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-
curriculum/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-
curriculum/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Curriculum%20in%20primary%20schools&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-
curriculum/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1739.5426

  * [ _Ownership of primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-schools/)

Who owns primary schools and how they are they funded?

1588.6078

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1551.2433

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

