**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Health and safety ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/health-and-safety/) > Health and safety at work

#  Health and safety at work

  * Introduction 
  * Employee’s responsibilities 
  * Employer’s responsibilities 
  * Health and safety leave during pregnancy 
  * Protective equipment and other safety measures 
  * Reporting an accident at work 
  * Bullying and harassment at work 
  * Make a complaint about health and safety at work 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Health and safety laws apply to all employers, self-employed people and
employees in their workplaces. This includes fixed-term employees and
temporary employees.

###  Laws on health and safety at work

The rights and obligations of both employers and employees in relation to
health and safety at work are set out in the [ Safety, Health and Welfare at
Work Act 2005 (as amended)
](http://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2005/act/10/front/revised/en/html) .
This Act also provides for substantial fines and penalties for any breaches of
the health and safety laws.

Many of the specific health and safety laws are set out in the [ Safety,
Health and Welfare at Work (General Application) Regulations 2007- 2020
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2007/en/si/0299.html) . Find [ details on
these regulations
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Legislation/Acts/Safety_Health_and_Welfare_at_Work/Safety_Health_and_Welfare_at_Work_Act.html#regulations)
on the Health and Safety Authority (HSA) website.

##  Employee’s responsibilities

As an employee, your duties at work include:

  * Taking reasonable care to protect the health and safety of yourself and other people in the workplace 
  * Not engaging in improper behaviour that will endanger yourself or others 
  * Not being under the influence of drink or drugs in the workplace 
  * Undergoing any reasonable medical assessment (or other assessment) if requested by your employer 
  * Reporting any defects (faults) in equipment or the workplace which might be a danger to health and safety 

##  Employer’s responsibilities

Employers must ensure their employees’ safety, health and welfare at work, as
far as reasonably practicable.

To prevent workplace injuries and ill-health, the employer must:

  * Provide and maintain a safe workplace (which uses safe plant and equipment) 
  * Prevent risks from employees using any article or substance, and from exposure to physical agents, noise and vibration 
  * Prevent any improper conduct or behaviour likely to put the safety, health and welfare of employees at risk 
  * Provide instruction and training to employees on health and safety 
  * Provide protective clothing and equipment to employees 
  * Appoint a competent person as the organisation’s safety officer 

Under the [ Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act, 2005
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2005/act/10/enacted/en/print) , employers
must allow you paid time off for safety awareness training.

###  Risk assessment and safety statement

Every employer must carry out a workplace risk assessment to:

  * Identify any hazards in the workplace 
  * Assess the risks arising from such hazards 
  * Identify the steps to be taken to deal with any risks 

The employer must also prepare a safety statement, based on the risk
assessment. The statement should include details of people in the workforce
who are responsible for safety issues. Employees should have access to this
statement and employers should review it regularly.

Read the [ guidelines on risk assessments and safety statements
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Safety_and_Health_Management/A_Guide_to_Risk_Assessments_and_Safety_Statements.html)
from the Health and Safety Authority (HSA).

###  Health and safety of young people at work

Employers should carry out a separate risk assessment if they are [ employing
someone aged under 18 ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/young-
people-at-work/rights-of-young-workers/) . This risk assessment must be
carried out before the young person gets the job.

The young person should not be given the job if certain risks are identified.
For example, risks that the young person cannot recognise or avoid because of
their lack of experience.

##  Health and safety leave during pregnancy

Employers should carry out separate risk assessments for pregnant employees.
If there are risks to an employee’s pregnancy, these risks should be removed
or the employee should be given alternative ‘risk-free’ duties.

If neither of these options are possible, the employee should be given ‘health
and safety leave’ from work. This leave can continue up to the beginning of
her maternity leave. This is set out in [ Section 18 of the Maternity
Protection Act 1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0034/sec0018.html#zza34y1994s18)
.

If a doctor certifies that night work would be unsuitable for a pregnant
employee, she must be given alternative work or health and safety leave.

###  Health and safety leave after maternity leave

When an employee returns to work after maternity leave, any risk to her
because she has recently given birth (or because she is breastfeeding), should
be removed. If this is not possible, the employee should be moved to
alternative ‘risk-free’ work. If a move is not possible, she should be given
health and safety leave.

If a doctor certifies that night work is unsuitable after the birth,
alternative work should be provided. If alternative work cannot be provided,
the employee should be given health and safety leave.

###  Your rights during health and safety leave

During health and safety leave, you are treated as if you are still in
employment. This means you continue to accumulate (build up) your entitlement
to annual leave. However, you are not entitled to leave for any public
holidays that happen during this time.

During health and safety leave, your employer must pay you your normal wages
for the first 21 days (3 weeks). After 3 weeks, you may be able to get [
Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-
safety-benefit/) , depending on your PRSI contributions.

##  Protective equipment and other safety measures

Employers should tell employees about any risks that require wearing
protective equipment (such as protective clothing, headgear, footwear, eyewear
or gloves).

The employer should give employees the protective equipment (free of charge if
it is intended for use at the workplace only). They should also provide
training on how to use the equipment, where necessary.

Usually, employees are given their own personal equipment, rather than
equipment to share. Employees have a duty to take reasonable care for their
own safety and to use any protective equipment provided.

Read the HSA's list of [ frequently asked questions about personal protective
equipment ](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Topics/Personal_Protective_Equipment_-
_PPE/PPE_-FAQs/Personal_Protective_Equipment_FAQ_Responses.html#PPE) .

###  Computer screens

Employers have responsibilities in relation to visual display units (VDUs),
such as computer screens. For example:

  * Checking the reflection and glare 
  * Checking the employee’s position in front of the VDU 
  * Checking the keyboard and software used 
  * Giving employees adequate breaks from the screen 

Employers must also arrange for eye tests and make a contribution towards the
cost of prescription glasses, if required.

Read the HSA's list of [ frequently asked questions about computer screens and
display screen equipment
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Workplace_Health/Manual_Handling_Display_Screen_Equipment/FAQs/)
(or VDUs).

##  Reporting an accident at work

All accidents in the workplace should be reported to the employer, who should
record the details of the incident.

Reporting the accident will help to protect the employee’s rights to social
welfare payments (see ‘Social welfare payments’ below). It also helps
employees regarding other rights that may arise due to an [ occupational
accident ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-
benefit-overview/) .

the accident), the employer must report the accident to the Health and Safety
Authority (HSA). This is a legal responsibility set out in the [ Safety,
Health and Welfare at Work (General Application) (Amendment) (No.3)
Regulations 2016.
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2016/si/370/made/en/print)

Read more about [ accidents in the workplace ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-workplace/) .

###  Social welfare payments

If you have an accident at work, you can apply for [ Injury Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/) . This is a
weekly payment from the Department of Social Protection (DSP) for people who
are unfit for work due to an accident at work, or due to an occupational
disease.

You can also claim certain medical costs that are not paid by the HSE or
covered by the DSP’s [ Treatment Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/treatment-benefit-scheme/) . This is set out
under the [ Medical Care Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/medical-care-scheme/) .

Read more about these payments in our page on the [ Occupational Injuries
Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-
injuries-benefit-overview/) .

###  Personal injury claims

You cannot claim compensation from your employer under the health and safety
legislation, but you can make a personal injury claim through the [ Injuries
Resolution Board ](/en/justice/civil-law/injuries-resolution-board/) .

The Injuries Resolution Board is an independent statutory body that assesses
personal injury claims after workplace accidents. If the Injuries Resolution
Board finds your employer is responsible for the accident, it will set the
amount of compensation they must pay you.

All claims involving workplace accidents and personal injury (except cases
involving medical negligence) must be submitted to the Injuries Resolution
Board. You cannot take your claim to court before the Injuries Resolution
Board gives you permission.

##  Bullying and harassment at work

By law, employers have a duty to prevent [ bullying ](/en/employment/equality-
in-work/bullying-at-work/) and [ harassment in the workplace
](/en/employment/equality-in-work/harassment-at-work/) .

Employers should have procedures for dealing with complaints of bullying and
harassment, and they should deal with these complaints immediately. Ignoring
complaints could leave an employer open to a possible claim by an employee for
damages or compensation.

Read the:

  * [ Code of Practice for the Prevention and Resolution of Bullying at Work (pdf) ](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/publications_and_forms/publications/codes_of_practice/code_of_practice_foremployers_and_employees_onthe_prevention_and_resolution_ofbullying_at_work.pdf)
  * [ Code of Practice on Sexual Harassment and Harassment at Work ](https://www.ihrec.ie/documents/code-of-practice-on-sexual-harassment-and-harassment-at-work-2/)

If you feel you are the victim of bullying or harassment at work, follow your
employer’s procedures (these may be set out in your employee handbook or
contract of employment).

If you cannot resolve the complaint with your employer, you can complain to
the [ Workplace Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/workplace-relations-commission/) – see ‘Make a complaint about health
and safety' below.

###  Violence at work

The possibility of violence towards employees should be covered in the safety
statement (see ‘Employer’s responsibilities’ above). For example, the safety
statement should address risk factors such as the isolation of employees and
the presence of cash on the premises.

Employers should put safeguards in place to eliminate the risk of violence, as
far as possible. They should also give the employee appropriate means to
minimise any remaining risk (for example, by installing security glass).

Read the HSA's booklet for employers on [ violence in the workplace (pdf)
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Occupational_Health/Violence_at_Work.pdf)
.

###  Assault at work

Assault, and being made to fear immediate assault, is a criminal offence under
the [ Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/act/26/enacted/en/html) .

If you have been assaulted (or threatened with assault) at work by another
employee, report the matter immediately to your employer. You can also [
report it to the Gardaí ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/reporting-a-crime/) .

If your employer assaults you, report the matter to the Gardaí.

You should contact your doctor or seek medical treatment for your injuries.
You can also call one of the [ organisations providing support to victims of
crime ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/support-services-for-victims-of-crime/) .

You can also apply for compensation by making a personal injuries claim – see
‘Personal injury claims’ above

##  Make a complaint about health and safety at work

To make a complaint about your rights under health and safety legislation,
contact the Workplace Relations Commission using their [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/complaints_disputes/making_a_complaint/)
.

You must make the complaint **within 6 months** of the incident. The time
limit may be extended for a further 6 months if there is a reasonable cause
for the delay.

###  Protecting your health and safety rights

By law, you cannot be [ victimised ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/victimisation-at-work/) for taking action to access your rights under
health and safety legislation.

For example, your employer cannot penalise you for making a complaint to the
HSA about health and safety at work. Penalising could be dismissing you,
taking disciplinary action, or treating you less favourably than other
employees.

##  More information

The Health and Safety Authority (HSA) is responsible for enforcing health and
safety at work. It gives information to employers, employees and self-employed
people on workplace health and safety.

The HSA has a set of [ Simple Safety leaflets
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Topics/Simple_Safety/) , which are aimed at small
retail or food businesses. The [ Simple Safety leaflets are available in other
languages
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Topics/Simple_Safety/Simple_Safety_in_Other_Languages/)
.

Read the HSA's [ Short Guide to the Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act
2005 (pdf)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Safety_and_Health_Management/Short_Guide_to_SHWWA_2005.pdf)
, or contact them using their [ online contact form
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/) .

###  Health and Safety Authority

The Metropolitan Building  
James Joyce Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 K0Y8

**Opening Hours:** Lines are open on Monday to Fridays 9am - 3pm

**Tel:** (01) 614 7000

**Locall:** 0818 289 389

**Fax:** (01) 614 7020

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hsa.ie ](https://www.hsa.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Contact_Us/)

**Email:** [ wcu@hsa.ie ](mailto:wcu@hsa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 25 August 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Health%20and%20safety%20at%20work&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Health%20and%20safety%20at%20work&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Health and Safety Benefit_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/)

A summary of Health and Safety Benefit for pregnant or breastfeeding women.

1545.9775

  * [ _Food safety and environmental health services_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-services/)

A brief description of the different agencies involved in food safety and
environmental health in Ireland and Europe.

1504.8219

  * [ _Food safety in the home_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-in-the-home/)

Practical advice and information on food safety in the home.

949.82446

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

