**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Further education and training ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/) > Adult literacy

#  Adult literacy

  * What is literacy? 
  * How can I improve my literacy? 
  * Your local Education and Training Board (ETB) 
  * National Adult Literacy Agency (NALA) 

##  What is literacy?

Literacy is more than just reading and writing. Literacy skills include:

  * Listening 
  * Speaking 
  * Using numbers 
  * Using everyday technology 

We all need literacy skills to communicate, access services, and make informed
choices. Literacy skills help us to enjoy a good quality of life within our
families, in our communities, and at work.

###  **Literacy and numeracy challenges in Ireland**

Many adults in Ireland feel they could improve their reading, writing, maths,
and digital skills.

  * 1 in 6 Irish adults finds reading and understanding everyday texts difficult. 
  * 1 in 4 Irish adults has problems doing maths. 
  * Almost half of Irish adults do not have the digital skills to use everyday technology. 

This means that many people find everyday tasks difficult, such as:

  * Filling in forms 
  * Paying bills 
  * Helping children with their homework 
  * Reading the instructions on a medicine bottle 
  * Shopping online 

But, you can improve your reading, writing, maths, and digital skills at any
age.

##  How can I improve my literacy?

People of every age and from every background can have literacy needs. It does
not matter if you have finished school or done exams, you can improve your
skills at any time for any reason.

You can get free adult literacy classes locally, by phone, or online.

Some places offering classes are:

  * [ Education and Training Boards (ETBs) ](https://www.etbi.ie/etbs/)
  * [ The National Adult Literacy Agency (NALA) ](https://www.nala.ie/)

##  Your local Education and Training Board (ETB)

The adult literacy service in [ your local Education and Training Board (ETB)
](https://www.adultliteracyforlife.ie/find-your-local-service/) provides
reading, writing, maths and computer classes for adults. They have centres
around the country.

All ETB tutors are specially trained to help you feel at ease and support you
to get the most out of your classes. You can use the service for as long as
you want, and you can take a break from a class and come back to it later.

###  Classes at the ETB

Literacy classes at your local ETB are:

  * Open to all adults who want to improve their reading, writing, maths, or computer skills 
  * Planned around what you want to learn 
  * Free 
  * Usually 2 hours per week 

###  How to sign up

If you want to take these literacy classes, you can [ contact your local ETB.
](https://www.adultliteracyforlife.ie/find-your-local-service/)

##  National Adult Literacy Agency (NALA)

The [ National Adult Literacy Agency (NALA) ](https://www.nala.ie/) is a
charity that works to improve adult literacy in Ireland.

All of NALAâ€™s literacy services are free and you can:

  * Learn with [ a tutor ](https://www.learnwithnala.ie/catalog?pagename=tutoring-service)
  * [ Learn online ](https://www.learnwithnala.ie/) at your own speed 

###  Learn with a tutor on the phone

NALA can work with you over the phone or online.

  * You decide what to study. There is no set course. 
  * NALA calls when it suits you. There is no class schedule. 
  * Normally, it is one call per week for up to 30 minutes. 
  * NALA keeps working with you until you meet your goals. 
  * Classes are available 7 days a week, early morning to late evening. 

###  Learn online with NALA

[ Learn with NALA ](https://www.nala.ie/free-courses/learn-with-nala/) helps
you to improve your reading, writing, maths, or digital skills. You can study
online by yourself or combine it a NALA tutor by phone.

[ Help My Kid Learn ](https://www.helpmykidlearn.ie/about/about-nala-this-
project) helps parents with fun learning activities for primary school
children.

###  How to sign up

To sign up, contact NALA by **freephone on 1800 20 20 65** .

You can find more information in the [ Adult Literacy for Life 10-Year
Strategy (pdf).
](https://www.adultliteracyforlife.ie/f/120607/x/133e8d1481/15607_all_strategy_web.pdf)

_**Page edited:** 30 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/adult-literacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Adult%20literacy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/adult-literacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/adult-literacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Adult%20literacy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/adult-literacy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _If your landlord wants you to leave_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/if-your-landlord-wants-you-to-leave/)

The rules that private landlords and approved housing bodies must comply with
when ending a residential tenancy.

1033.9677

  * [ _How to apply for your first Irish passport as an adult_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/passports/applying-for-or-renewing-an-irish-passport/)

A guide to making your first passport application if you are age 18 or over.

879.4927

  * [ _Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

749.7035

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

