**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/) > [ Fees and
supports for third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/) > Tax relief for third-level fees

#  Tax relief for third-level fees

  * Can I get tax back on third-level fees? 
  * Payments that qualify for tax relief 
  * Courses that qualify for tax relief 
  * Rate of tax relief 
  * How to apply 

##  Can I get tax back on third-level fees?

You may get tax relief on tuition fees paid for:

  * Undergraduate courses 
  * Postgraduate courses 
  * Information technology (IT) and foreign language courses. 

[ Lists of courses and colleges approved ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-
tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-
level-education/approved-colleges-and-courses.aspx) for tax relief each year
are published on the Revenue website.

You can claim tax relief if you have paid the fees, either on your own behalf
or on behalf of another person.

You **cannot** claim tax relief on:

  * Examination or administration fees 
  * Any part of the tuition fees that is met directly or indirectly by a grant, a scholarship or otherwise (for example, where fees are reimbursed by an employer). 

Read more about [ tuition fees and the Student Contribution
](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-
education/fees/) .

###  **Budget 2024**

The [ Rent Tax Credit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/rent-tax-credit/) is extended to parents of
students renting a room or digs in 2024. The tax credit will also be available
to claim for the 2022 and 2023 tax years.

##  Payments that qualify for tax relief

The maximum amount of fees (including the **Student Contribution** ) that can
qualify for tax relief is €7,000 per person, per course, per academic year.

**Full-time student** : There is no tax relief on the first €3,000 spent on
tuition fees (including the Student Contribution) for [ each tax year
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-level-education/index.aspx) .

**Part-time student** : There is no tax relief on the first €1,500 spent on
tuition fees (including the Student Contribution) for each tax year.

**More than one student** : If you are claiming for more than one student, you
will get full tax relief on tuition fees (including the Student Contribution)
for the second or subsequent students.

You can find examples of [ how the tuition fees tax relief works
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-level-education/how-do-you-
calculate-the-relief.aspx) on the Revenue website.

##  Courses that qualify for tax relief

###  Undergraduate courses

Tax relief is available for tuition fees paid for:

  * Approved full-time and part-time undergraduate courses in both private and publicly funded third-level colleges in the State 
  * Approved full-time and part-time undergraduate courses in both private and publicly funded third-level colleges in any EU member state or in the UK. This includes courses in medicine, veterinary medicine, dentistry and teacher training. 
  * Full-time and part-time undergraduate courses operated by colleges in any EU member state and in the UK providing distance education in the State. 

###  Conditions for granting tax relief for undergraduate courses

  * Courses must be for at least 2 years' duration 
  * Colleges and courses within the State must be approved by the Department of Education and Skills 

###  Postgraduate courses

Tax relief is available for tuition fees paid for:

  * Approved postgraduate courses in private and publicly funded colleges in the State 
  * Postgraduate courses in a university or publicly funded college in another EU member state or the UK, including such colleges that provide distance education in the State 
  * Postgraduate courses in a university or publicly funded third-level college in non-EU countries. 

###  Conditions for granting tax relief for postgraduate courses

  * Courses must be for at least one academic year but not more than 4 academic years in duration and must lead to a postgraduate award based on either a thesis or an examination. 
  * The person taking the course must already have a primary degree or an equivalent qualification. 

###  Information technology and foreign language courses

You can get tax relief on fees paid for training courses in information
technology and foreign languages (other than postgraduate courses) if the
course:

  * Is less than 2 years' duration 
  * Awards a certificate of competence (and not just a certificate of attendance) 
  * Is on [ Revenue's list of approved courses ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/education/foreign-language-and-it-courses/index.aspx) . 

###  Details of schemes

Revenue publishes detailed [ information about tax relief for tuition fees
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-level-education/index.aspx) ,
covering tax relief for undergraduate and postgraduate courses and tax relief
for [ information technology and foreign language courses
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/education/foreign-language-and-it-courses/index.aspx) .

##  Rate of tax relief

Tax relief is given at the standard rate of 20%.

There is no limit on the number of people for whom you can claim.

**Paying fees in instalments**

If you pay fees in instalments and at least one instalment is paid in the tax
year following the year your course started, then the relief for fees relating
to that academic year may be granted either:

  * In the tax year the course started, or 
  * The tax year in which the instalment was paid. 

It is generally more beneficial for you to claim tax relief in the tax year
that the course started. You can find [ examples of when it is of greater
benefit to claim on Revenue’s website ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-
tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-
level-education/paying-tuition-fees-in-instalments.aspx) .

Relief will only be granted in respect of amounts actually paid and subject to
the maximum relief available in that year.

**Undergraduate and postgraduate courses** :

The maximum amount of fees (including the Student Contribution) that can
qualify for tax relief is €7,000 per person, per course, per academic year.

**Information technology and foreign language courses** :

The course fees paid must not be less than €315 and not more than €1,270
(these refer to the course fee and are not simply an amount per annum).

##  How to apply

You can claim tax relief on fees paid for undergraduate, postgraduate, IT and
foreign language courses using Revenue's [ myAccount service
](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) .

If you’re self-employed, you can apply for tax relief on tuition fees by using
[ Revenue’s Online Service (ROS) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-
services/support/help-guides/ros/guide-to-ros.aspx) .

Alternatively, you can download the application form to [ claim tax relief on
undergraduate or postgraduate tuition fees (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/documents/education/form-it31.pdf) or to [ claim tax relief on IT
and foreign language tuition fees (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-
tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/documents/education/form-it31.pdf) and
return it to [ your Revenue office ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-
us/index.aspx) .

**Keeping receipts for Revenue:** You do not need to submit your receipts for
fees paid with your claim, but you must keep them as Revenue may ask to see
them.

Once you have made your claim, you must keep your receipts for fees paid for 6
years. You can use Revenue’s [ receipt tracker service
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/common/manage-your-
receipts-with-receipts-tracker.aspx) to keep a digital record of your
receipts.

Further information on tax relief on third-level fees is available from [ your
Revenue Office ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) .

_**Page edited:** 11 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-
third-level-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20relief%20for%20third-
level%20fees&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-
level-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-
third-level-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20relief%20for%20third-
level%20fees&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-
level-fees/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Third-level student fees and charges_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/)

Information on the Free Fees Iniative. Explains who doesn't have to pay third-
level fees.

2863.5938

  * [ _Tax relief on nursing home fees and for dependent relatives_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-for-dependent-relatives/)

Tax relief is available on fees paid for nursing homes and for dependent
relatives. Information on tax credits and how to apply for tax relief.

2747.5015

  * [ _Third-level courses and mature students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-students/)

This page describes the different full-time and part-time educational options
available to adults at third level.

2529.832

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

