**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Attendance and discipline in schools
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-
in-schools/) > School terms in primary and post-primary school

#  School terms in primary and post-primary school

  * When does the school year start and end? 
  * School holidays 
  * School year 2023-2024 
  * School year 2024-2025 
  * School year 2025-2026 

##  When does the school year start and end?

The dates for the start and the end of the school year are not the same for
all schools. Schools can decide when students start school in the autumn, and
when they finish school in the summer.

The school year normally starts in the week in which 1 September falls.

Post-primary schools usually close before the June public holiday (the first
Monday in June) due to the start of State exams in June. Primary schools
usually close in the last week of June.

All schools are closed for July and most (or all) of August.

##  School holidays

Every school year, primary and post-primary schools also close for:

  * Autumn mid-term break 
  * Christmas 
  * February mid-term break 
  * Easter 

These holidays are standardised. The [ dates are set by the Department of
Education ](https://www.gov.ie/en/circular/0a2b0-standardisation-of-the-
school-year-in-respect-of-primary-post-primary-schools-for-the-
years-202324-202425-and-202526/) . See dates for the 'School year 2023-2024'
below.

At the start of the school year, you will get a list of days that the school
will be closed during the year, including holidays and training days for
teachers. If there are other unexpected closures, the school will let you know
in advance.

###  Discretionary days

Every school must be open for a minimum number of days:

  * Primary schools - 183 days 
  * Post-primary schools - 167 days 

Schools can use any remaining days at their discretion to extend the summer
holiday period or to close on religious or other holidays.

However, schools cannot use the discretionary days to extend the Christmas,
Easter or mid-term breaks (unless a religious observance day(s) falls at that
time for schools of a particular denomination or faith). If a school does not
have enough discretionary days left for a religious holiday, it can choose not
to have classes on that day.

Some schools use their discretionary days to extend bank holiday weekends and
others extend the May bank holiday break to a full week. You should check with
your school for details of the school holidays and any other planned
closures..

##  School year 2023-2024

###  October 2023 mid-term break

All schools close from Monday, 30 October 2023, to Friday, 3 November 2023
inclusive.

###  Christmas 2023

All schools close on Friday, 22 December 2023, which is the final day of the
school term. All schools re-open on Monday, 8 January 2024.

###  February 2024 mid-term break

All **primary schools** close on Thursday, 15 February 2024, and Friday, 16
February 2024. Primary schools can use 3 discretionary days to extend this to
a 5-day break starting on Monday, 12 February 2024 unless they need these days
to make up for time lost due to unforeseen school closures.

Unforeseen school closures might happen, for example, due to bad weather.

**Post-primary schools** close for a week, from Monday, 12 February 2024, to
Friday, 16 February 2024 inclusive, unless changes are needed to make up for
time lost due to unforeseen school closures.

If a post-primary school needs to make up such time, it can shorten the mid-
term break by staying open, up to and including Wednesday, 14 February 2024.

###  Easter 2024

All schools close on Friday, 22 March 2024, which is the final day of the
school term, unless changes are needed to make up for time lost due to
unforeseen school closures. If a school needs to make up such time, it can
shorten the Easter break by staying open, up to and including Wednesday, 27
March 2024.

All schools re-open on Monday, 8 April 2024.

##  School year 2024-2025

###  October 2024 mid-term break

All schools close from Monday, 28 October 2024, to Friday, 1 November 2024
inclusive.

###  Christmas 2024

All schools close on Friday, 20 December 2024 which is the final day of the
school term. All schools re-open on Monday, 6 January 2025.

###  February 2025 mid-term break

All **primary schools** close on Thursday, 20 February 2025, and Friday, 21
February 2025. Primary schools can use 3 discretionary days to extend this to
a 5-day break starting on Monday, 17 February 2025 unless they need these days
to make up for time lost due to unforeseen school closures.

Unforeseen school closures might happen, for example, due to bad weather.

**Post-primary schools** close for a week, from Monday, 17 February 2025, to
Friday, 21 February 2025 inclusive, unless changes are needed to make up for
time lost due to unforeseen school closures.

If a post-primary school needs to make up such time, it can shorten the mid-
term break by staying open, up to and including Wednesday, 19 February 2025.

###  Easter 2025

All schools close on Friday, 11 April 2025, which is the final day of the
school term, unless changes are needed to make up for time lost due to
unforeseen school closures. If a school needs to make up such time, it can
shorten the Easter break by staying open, up to and including Wednesday, 16
April 2025.

All schools re-open on Monday, 28 April 2025.

##  School year 2025-2026

###  October 2025 mid-term break

All schools close from Monday, 27 October 2025, to Friday, 31 October 2025
inclusive.

###  Christmas 2025

All schools close on Friday, 19 December 2025, which is the final day of the
school term. All schools re-open on Monday, 5 January 2026.

###  February 2026 mid-term break

All **primary schools** close on Thursday, 19 February 2026, and Friday, 20
February 2026. Primary schools can use 3 discretionary days to extend this to
a 5-day break starting on Monday, 16 February 2026, unless they need these
days to make up for time lost due to unforeseen school closures.

Unforeseen school closures might happen, for example, due to bad weather.

**Post-primary schools** close for a week, from Monday, 16 February 2026, to
Friday, 20 February 2026 inclusive, unless changes are needed to make up for
time lost due to unforeseen school closures.

If a post-primary school needs to make up such time, it can shorten the mid-
term break by staying open, up to and including Wednesday, 18 February 2026.

###  Easter 2026

All schools close on Friday, 27 March 2026, which is the final day of the
school term, unless changes are needed to make up for time lost due to
unforeseen school closures. If a school needs to make up such time, it can
shorten the Easter break by staying open, up to and including Wednesday, 1
April 2026.

All schools re-open on Monday, 13 April 2026.

_**Page edited:** 27 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-
in-primary-and-postprimary/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=School%20terms%20in%20primary%20and%20post-
primary%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-
in-primary-and-postprimary/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-
in-primary-and-postprimary/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=School%20terms%20in%20primary%20and%20post-
primary%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-
in-primary-and-postprimary/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

2954.811

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

2904.8276

  * [ _Admissions policies in primary and secondary schools_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/)

Explains the rules about admissions policies in schools in Ireland and changes
under the Education (Admission to Schools) Act 2018.

2848.9998

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

