**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/) > [ Fees and
supports for third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/) > Postgraduate student grants

#  Postgraduate student grants

  * Can I get a student grant as a postgraduate student? 
  * What type of postgraduate grants can I get? 
  * Means test and income limits for the postgraduate student grant 
  * Applying for a student grant 
  * Contact SUSI 
  * Other financial supports for postgraduate students 

##  Can I get a student grant as a postgraduate student?

If you are enrolling in a postgraduate course, you may get financial support
under the [ Student Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) .

To qualify for a student grant, you must meet [ nationality, immigration and
residency criteria ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-
scheme/#19584a) . You must also pass a means test (see ‘Means test and income
limits for the postgraduate student grant’ below).

Student grant applications for the [ academic year 2024-2025 are open
](https://www.susi.ie/how-to-apply/) . You apply online for a student grant
(see ‘Applying for a student grant' below).

[ Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) ](https://www.grantsonline.ie/) is
the grant-awarding authority that handles all grant applications.

###  **International protection students**

If you are in the international protection system, you may qualify for
financial support through the [ International Protection Student Scheme (for
Further and Higher Education Students) 2024-2025
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e786a-student-support-scheme-for-asylum-
seekers/) .

##  What type of postgraduate grants can I get?

You can qualify for assistance under the Student Grant Scheme in one of the
following 3 ways:

  1. A postgraduate fee contribution of up to €4,000 and a maintenance grant. 
  2. A postgraduate fee grant of up to €6,270 and a maintenance grant, if you qualify for the special rate of grant (see ‘Special rate of grant’ below). 
  3. A postgraduate fee contribution only of up to €4,000. 

Financial assistance is available under the Student Grant Scheme towards the
cost of tuition fees for [ approved postgraduate courses in Ireland and
Northern Ireland ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/approved-
courses/postgraduate-approved-institutions-and-courses/) .

**You cannot get support under the Student Grant Scheme for postgraduate
courses in another EU country.**

###  **How much** **maintenance grant will I get?**

The SUSI maintenance grant rate you get depends on:

  * Your assessed means (see ‘Means test and income limits for the postgraduate student grant’ below) 
  * The distance you normally live from the college (you get the ‘adjacent rate’ if you normally live 30 kilometres or less from your college, and the ‘non-adjacent’ rate if you live more than 30 kilometres away) 
  * If you’re a disadvantaged student (see ‘Special rate of grant’ below) 

**Rates of maintenance grant avaialble for 2024-2025** **Type of student grant** |  **Non-adjacent rate** |  **Adjacent rate**  
---|---|---  
Special rate  |  €7,586  |  €3,230   
Full maintenance  Band 1  |  €4,292  |  €1,774   
Part maintenance  Band 2  |  €3,332  |  €1,343   
Part maintenance  Band 3  |  €2,502  |  €975   
Part maintenance  Band 4  |  €1,666  |  €612   
  
###  **Special rate of grant**

Postgraduate students who meet a number of conditions may qualify for the
special rate of grant. If you qualify, you can get your tuition fees paid and
essential field trips (up to €6,270). You may also qualify for a special
maintenance grant.

To qualify for the special rate of grant:

  * You must have met the [ conditions for the standard maintenance grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) under the Student Grant Scheme for the academic year 2024-2025. 
  * Your total reckonable income in the tax year January to December 2023 must be €26,200 or less, not including [ Qualified Child Increases ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) and standard exclusions (the reckonable income limit can increase with the number of dependent children – see ‘Other family members in college’ below). 
  * Your parents or guardian (or you, if you are an independent student), must be getting certain social welfare payments or participating in a designated programme on 31 December 2023. 

Qualifying social welfare payments and programmes include:

  * Long-term social welfare payments 
  * [ Working Family Payment (WFP) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)
  * Designated programmes (for example, a [ Community Employment Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/) ) 

You can find out more about [ what social welfare payments and schemes are
eligible ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/special-rate-of-
grant/) , and how they can be combined to help you meet the required criteria.

###  **Who can’t get a maintenance grant?**

You cannot get a maintenance grant if you are:

  * Getting a [ Back To Education Allowance (BTEA) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/)
  * Getting a [ Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme (VTOS) allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/)
  * A [ tuition student ](https://susi.ie/undergraduate-student/residency-criteria/)

A tuition student is someone who fulfils all the conditions for a student
grant except for residence in the State, but who has been resident in an EEA
state or Switzerland for 3 of the last 5 years.

##  Means test and income limits for the postgraduate student grant

The means test for a student grant in 2024-2025 is based on your and your
family's gross income for the previous full tax year (2023). However, if you
or your family have had a [ change of circumstances
](https://www.susi.ie/applications-in-progress-next-steps/change-in-
circumstances/index.html) from 1 January 2024, your changed circumstances will
be taken into account. See [ what counts as a change in circumstances
](https://www.susi.ie/applications-in-progress-next-steps/change-in-
circumstances/index.html) on the SUSI website.

SUSI looks at all ’reckonable income’ when assessing your student grant
application. Reckonable income is gross income from all sources. Some social
welfare payments and financial support payments are excluded.

You can deduct up to €7,925 (previously €6,552) for your earnings outside of
term-time (known as ‘holiday earnings’).

Your [ applicant class ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-
criteria/income/applicant-class/) determines whose income is included in the
income calculation for grant assessment purposes. There are 3 types of
applicant class:

  * [ Dependent student ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/applicant-class/dependent-students/)
  * [ Mature dependent student ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/applicant-class/dependent-students/#d.en.11691:~:text=Will%20Appointed\)%20Guardians-,Mature%20Dependent%20Student,-If%20you%20were)
  * [ Independent student ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/applicant-class/independent-students/)

Read more about reckonable income [ on the SUSI website
](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/index.html) and in the [
Student Grant Scheme 2024 (pdf)
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/103/made/en/pdf) .

###  Income limits for maintenance grant and fee grant

The family income limits for a maintenance grant and a postgraduate fee
contribution in 2024-2025 are set out in the table below. These income limits
are applied after your means are assessed.

**Number of dependent children** |  **Full maintenance (Band 1)** |  **Part maintenance (Band 2)** |  **Part maintenance (Band 3)** |  **Part maintenance (Band 4)**  
---|---|---|---|---  
Less than 4  |  €40,875  |  €41,970  |  €44,380  |  €50,840   
4 to 7  |  €44,810  |  €46,025  |  €48,670  |  €55,768   
8 or more  |  €48,575  |  €49,890  |  €52,760  |  €60,445   
  
###  Income limits for the fee grant only

The family income limits for a standard rate postgraduate fee contribution
only (with no maintenance grant) in 2024-2025 are set out in the table below.

**Number of dependent children** |  **Reckonable income limits**  
---|---  
Less than 4  |  €55,240   
4-7  |  €60,595   
8 or more  |  €65,700   
  
####  **Other family members in college**

The reckonable income limits may be increased for each additional family
member who is doing a full-time course of at least one year’s duration:

  * In full maintenance (Band 1), special rate and postgraduate fee contribution only categories by €4,950 
  * In part maintenance (Bands 2, 3 and 4) categories by €4,785 

If you are an independent student, the family member taken into account is
your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant. If you are dependent on your
parents, the family members taken into account are your parent(s) and their
other dependent children.

Read more about [ income limits for postgraduate students.
](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/postgraduate-income-
thresholds-and-grant-award-rates/)

##  Applying for a student grant

Online applications for the [ student grant 2024-2025 are open
](https://www.susi.ie/how-to-apply/) . The closing date for grant applications
is usually sometime in November.

You must apply for your grant [ on the SUSI website online
](https://www.grantsonline.ie/auth/esr.elogin) . If your application is
successful, your grant or fee contribution is awarded when you confirm you
have accepted your college place.

Read about how to:

  * [ Apply for a student grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#4d7e38)
  * [ Appeal to SUSI ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#cc08ae) if you are unhappy with a decision made about your application 
  * [ Renew your student grant application ](https://www.susi.ie/renewal-applications/) for another academic year 

##  Contact SUSI

If you have any questions or need help applying for a student grant, contact
the SUSI Support desk Monday-Friday, 9am-5.30pm (excluding public holidays).

###  Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI)

P.O. Box 869  
Little Island  
Cork

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 9.00am – 5.30pm (excluding public
holidays)

**Tel:** 0818 888 777 (Ireland), or (+353)1 524 2257 (calling from abroad)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.susi.ie/ ](https://www.susi.ie/)

**Email:** [ support@susi.ie ](mailto:support@susi.ie)

##  Other financial supports for postgraduate students

You can claim [ tax relief
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/) on
postgraduate tuition fees.

You should contact your college or university to find out about other [
financial supports ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/financial-
supports-for-students/) , scholarships or bursaries available. You can also
find information on the [ Higher Education Authority website
](http://www.studentfinance.ie/mp9490/other-finance/index.html) .

Some [ financial institutions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/borrowing-money-in-ireland/#5f18f1)
offer loans to students to want to do a postgraduate course.

_**Page edited:** 3 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-
student-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Postgraduate%20student%20grants&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-
student-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-
student-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Postgraduate%20student%20grants&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-
student-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Grants and funds for mature students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-students/)

Information on grants and funds available for mature students in third-level
education.

1466.1136

  * [ _Student Grant Scheme_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/)

This page explains the Student Grant Scheme (also called the SUSI Grant). Find
out how to apply for a grant and the grant rates.

1400.523

  * [ _Assistive technology grant for students with disabilities_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/assistive-technology-grant-students-with-disabilities/)

This document describes a scheme that provides a grant to schools to allow
them to buy equipment for students with disabilities at post-primary level.

1244.104

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

