**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Employment support schemes ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/) > Community Services Programme

#  Community Services Programme

  * What is the Community Services Programme 
  * Types of projects funded 
  * Organisations that qualify 
  * Funding available 
  * How to apply 
  * More information 

##  What is the Community Services Programme

The Community Services Programme (CSP) supports community-based organisations
to provide local services and create employment opportunities for
disadvantaged groups and people, such as people with disabilities, Travellers,
recovering drug misusers, ex-prisoners, and long- term unemployed.

It gives financial support to community companies and co-operatives to help
with the cost of hiring staff.

The programme focuses on communities where public and private sector services
are lacking, either through geographical or social isolation or because of low
levels of demand.

The [ Community Services Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-
information/487d0f-the-community-services-programme/) is managed by Pobal on
behalf of the Department of Rural and Community Development.

##  Types of projects funded

Applicants must be not-for-profit social enterprises or community businesses
that can deliver services and manage staff.

They must also have enough financial resources and the ability to generate
adequate revenue and prepare a business plan.

The programme has 3 parts:

**Sub-Programme 1 - Spaces and services** : support organisations that support
the community to increase inclusiveness and reduce disadvantage by using
community spaces better or offering services to the local area (or both).

**Sub-Programme 2 - Supporting individuals:** support organisations that
create jobs for specific groups and areas with high unemployment.
Organisations will focus on:

  * Helping individuals progress in their careers 
  * Offering skill development and training 
  * Connecting with local supports 

**Sub-Programme 3 - Innovation and Growth:** supports social enterprises to
grow faster, become self-sufficient and promote new solutions to local
problems, such as climate change or the green economy.

##  Organisations that qualify

The CSP supports social enterprises or community businesses providing local
social, economic, and environmental services through a social enterprise
model.

To qualify, organisations must operate on a not-for-profit basis. They must
also recruit unemployed people to work on the projects. In general, 70% of
employees funded under the programme must be from the following groups:

  * Unemployed people in receipt of Jobseeker’s Benefit, Jobseeker’s Allowance or One-Parent Family Payment 
  * People in receipt of Disability Allowance, Invalidity Pension or Blind Person’s Pension or other disability payment 
  * Travellers 
  * Ex-prisoners 
  * Stabilised and recovering drug misusers 
  * People employed by Tús, Community Employment (CE), Job Initiative schemes, as well as Rural Social Scheme workers who are former CE participants 
  * Migrants 
  * Refugees 
  * Asylum seekers 
  * Roma 
  * People who are deserted, separated, divorced, or widowed 
  * Carers who want to return to work 
  * People who are homeless 
  * Ukrainians displaced by the war 

##  Funding available

Funding is provided to community organisations to help with the cost of hiring
an agreed number of workers and a manager.

Annual rates of funding are calculated for each organisation and can be
between €19,033 to €23,033 per employee and €32,000 to €36,000 per manager.

You can get more information about [ funding for local community staff
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/f8f93d-apply-for-community-service-programme/)
.

Information about the Community Services Programme is available on the [ Pobal
website
](https://www.pobal.ie/Beneficiaries/CommunityServicesProgramme/Pages/default.aspx)
and on [ gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/487d0f-the-
community-services-programme/) .

##  How to apply

Social enterprises interested in joining CSP can download an expression of
interest form from the Department of Rural and Community Development and send
it to [ csp@drcd.gov.ie ](mailto:csp@drcd.gov.ie) .

##  More information

You can get [ more information on the CSP (pdf)
](https://www.pobal.ie/app/uploads/2018/06/CSP-Interim-Manual-
January-2023-2.pdf) and how to apply on the [ Pobal website
](https://www.pobal.ie/programmes/community-services-programme-csp/) .

###  Pobal

Holbrook House  
Holles Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 EY84  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 511 7000

**Fax:** (01) 511 7981

**Homepage:** [ http://www.pobal.ie/ ](http://www.pobal.ie/)

**Email:** [ enquiries@pobal.ie ](mailto:enquiries@pobal.ie)

_**Page edited:** 17 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-services-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Community%20Services%20Programme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-services-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-services-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Community%20Services%20Programme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-services-
programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Community Crime Prevention Programmes_ ](/en/justice/crime-and-crime-prevention/community-crime-prevention-programmes/)

Information about the 3 main Community Crime Prevention Programmes in Ireland:
Neighbourhood Watch, Community Alert and Text Alert

1699.0388

  * [ _Community Childcare Subvention Plus (CCSP) Saver Programme_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/community-childcare-subvention-programme/)

The CCSP Saver Programme supports disadvantaged parents and parents in
training, education or low-paid employment to access childcare at reduced
rates.

1438.2146

  * [ _Community care services_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/community-care-services/)

Public health services in Ireland delivered in the community are called
community care services. Overview of services and links to other sections of
this site.

1369.6909

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

