**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Contracts of employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/) > Transfer of business (TUPE)

#  Transfer of business (TUPE)

  * Introduction 
  * What is a transfer of undertakings? 
  * Who is covered by TUPE? 
  * Your employment rights under TUPE 
  * Information and consultation rights 
  * How to complain about a TUPE 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Your rights are protected if another employer takes over your current
employer’s business under a legal merger or transfer.

This protection applies whether **the entire business** is sold or **only the
department or area where you work** . For example, if your employer transfers
its customer service department to another company, you are still protected.

**The law covering transfer of undertakings**

The law that applies is the [ European Communities (Protection of Employees on
Transfer of Undertakings) Regulations 2003.
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/si/0131.html)

An _undertaking_ can be a business, a charity or a non-profit organisation.

##  What is a transfer of undertakings?

A transfer of undertakings (also known as TUPE) is when employees are moved to
a new employer as part of a legal merger or the sale of a business.

For a transfer of undertaking to take place, the following conditions must be
met:

  * There must be a change in the entity (either an individual or a company) responsible for managing the business. 
  * The new employer must continue the previous economic activities of the business. 
  * The business must be transferred as a "going concern". 

###  **What does not count as a transfer of undertakings?**

####  **Compulsory liquidation**

Compulsory or involuntary liquidation of the business means that the business
is forced to close by the courts. This does not count as a transfer of
undertaking under the Regulations.

####  **Service changes**

A change of contractors is not a transfer of an undertaking. So, if a new
service contractor takes over a contract from your employer, you generally
won’t have the right to transfer to the new contractor under TUPE.

Service contract changes are common in contracts for office cleaning,
catering, or security.

##  Who is covered by TUPE?

TUPE applies to the following types of workers:

  * Employees 
  * Apprentices 
  * Agency workers 
  * Civil servants or state employees 

The legislation covers a business, charity, or a non-profit organisation.

##  Your employment rights under TUPE

Your employment rights are protected under TUPE.

###  **Contract of employment**

Your new employer is legally obligated to take on the existing employees of
the business. They must maintain the same terms and conditions, except
pensions (explained below).

This means that the terms and conditions in your [ employment contract
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) and your
employer’s obligations, automatically transfer to your new employer.

If there is a collective agreement in place, for example, on shift
arrangements or overtime) your new employer must continue to keep to its terms
and conditions until it either expires or is replaced.

A transfer of business does not break your continuity of service for [
redundancy legislation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/) purposes. Instead, it carries over to your new
employment.

###  **Pension rights**

Employee pension rights in relation to old age, invalidity, or survivor
benefits generally do not transfer to the new employer.

If you have an existing occupational pension, it may not continue in the same
way. This means the new employer is not obligated to make the same pension
contributions on your behalf. However, any entitlements you have built up
before the transfer must be protected by the new employer.

If your previous employer offered entitlements similar to pension schemes,
such as a lump sum entitlement on dismissal before retirement, the new
employer must ensure that those rights are protected and continue.

It’s important to note that pensions under TUPE law can be complex, and you
may need to contact the trustees of your pension scheme or get legal advice
for more guidance.

###  **Dismissal**

The transfer of a business (or part of it), does not automatically give your
employer the right to dismiss you.

However, your employer can end your employment if they have justifiable
economic, technical, or organisational reasons.

Whether these reasons are justified will depend on the specific circumstances
of each case. If you disagree with the grounds for dismissal, you can claim
for [ unfair dismissal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) \- see 'How to complain about a TUPE'
below.

###  **Unfair dismissal**

If your employment contract is terminated due to a transfer that substantially
worsens your working conditions, your employer is considered responsible for
the termination.

For example, if your new employer cuts your wages leading you to resign, your
new employer is held responsible for not honoring your employment contract.

##  Information and consultation rights

You have a right to be informed and consulted by your employer on issues
directly affecting you. This right is set out in the [ Employees (Provision of
Information and Consultation) Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0009/index.html) .

Employers must inform and consult employees on any decisions likely to lead to
substantial changes to work organisation or contractual relations.

Employers with at least 50 employees must engage in this process and consult
with employees’ union or, if no union exists, with chosen employee
representatives.

**Information you must get**

You or your union must get the following details of the transfer:

  * The reasons for the transfer 
  * The date or proposed date of the transfer 
  * An assessment of the legal, economic, and social implications for the employees 

If you are part of a union, the union must get this information no later than
30 days before the transfer.

If you are not part of a union, you must get the information in writing from
your employer no later than 30 days before the transfer.

This requirement also applies to employers with less than 50 employees.

##  How to complain about a TUPE

###  **Complain to the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC)**

You can bring a complaint to the WRC within 6 months if:

  * You have been dismissed because of the transfer, or 
  * Your employer failed to consult you or your union 

The time limit may be extended for up to a further 6 months if there was
reasonable cause for the delay.

Use the online complaint form on [ workplacerelations.ie
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

###  **Complain about your pension**

Complaints about pensions covered by the Pensions Acts should be referred to
the Pensions Authority - see 'Where to complain' below. Complaints about other
pensions should be referred as above.

##  More information

Get more information on the transfer of undertakings from the Workplace
Relations Commission's Information and Customer Service.

The Code of Practice on Employee Involvement in the Workplace and an
explanatory booklet on the [ transfer of undertakings (pdf)
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/Guide_to_EC_Protection_of_Employees_on_Transfer_of_Undertakings_Regulations.pdf)
are on [ workplacerelations.ie
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

###  Pensions Authority

Verschoyle House  
28-30 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 613 1900

**Homepage:** [ https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@pensionsauthority.ie ](mailto:info@pensionsauthority.ie)

_**Page edited:** 2 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/transfer-of-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Transfer%20of%20business%20%28TUPE%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/transfer-of-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/transfer-of-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Transfer%20of%20business%20%28TUPE%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/transfer-of-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Understanding your tax as a business owner_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/understanding-your-tax-as-a-business-owner/)

If you own a business, you must make sure it is tax compliant and that you
make tax returns annually. This page outlines the tax obligations you must
meet as a sole trader or partnership in Ireland.

1235.4333

  * [ _Company gone out of business_ ](/en/consumer/buying-services/company-gone-out-of-business/)

Find out about how to check whether a company has gone out of business and
whether you can claim money owed to you.

1231.3789

  * [ _Closing your business_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/closing-a-business/)

Find out about important considerations when you decide to sell or close your
business.

1184.3533

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

