**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Special education needs ](/en/education/special-education-needs/) >
Special needs education in primary schools

#  Special needs education in primary schools

  * Introduction 
  * Special education teachers 
  * Special needs assistants 
  * Home Tuition Scheme 
  * Summer education programme 
  * Irish Sign Language (ISL) scheme 
  * Visiting Teacher Service 
  * Other supports 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Children with [ special educational needs ](/en/education/special-education-
needs/special-education/) may be in ordinary classes in mainstream primary
schools or in special classes in these schools. They may get additional
educational support from special education teachers and care support from
special needs assistants (SNAs).

##  Special education teachers

####  **Allocating special education teachers to schools**

Each school gets a single allocation of special education teachers. The number
of special education teachers allocated to a school is determined by the size
of the school and its educational profile.

A school’s educational profile is broadly based on the number of students with
complex special educational needs, the results of standardised tests and the
social context of the school taking account of disadvantage and gender.

The arrangement recognises that all schools need an allocation for special
needs support, but provides a graduated allocation which takes into account
the actual level of need in each school.

Schools are provided with the necessary resources in advance so that children
with special educational needs can be enrolled into schools and access the
additional teaching supports they need.

You can find further information in the Department of Education’s [ Circular
0013/2017 (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/12768/ca1cbebc2e764367a9611b23b5886073.pdf)
and [ Circular 0002/2024 (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/282686/7944731c-b15e-4a98-b76a-b06d899e4789.pdf#page=null)
.

####  **Providing special education teachers to pupils**

All schools have an allocation of special education teachers which they can
use to provide additional support to children who need it. Support is provided
taking into account a child’s learning needs. It is no longer based on a
diagnosis of a particular disability.

The additional teaching may be provided in the classroom or in small separate
groups. Some pupils may need additional one-to-one teaching for a specified
period.

Schools use the [ guidelines for primary schools supporting pupils with
special educational needs (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/86911/e2ab0e65-f360-45a4-8075-37a4123838c3.pdf)
to help them identify pupils who require support and to plan individualised
learning programmes.

Parents or guardians do not have to source or pay for assessments for their
child to get extra teaching support in school and schools don’t have to wait
for these assessments to give children the extra teaching support they need.

The Department of Education provides [ information for parents and guardians
on how your child can get additional teaching support in school (pdf)
](https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/123794/92dd3bfe-
cc8d-4238-80f5-2592cee9d137.pdf) .

####  **If you have concerns about the support given to your child with
special needs**

If you have concerns with the level of support being given to your child, you
should discuss this first with your child’s class teacher or special education
teacher. You could also discuss these issues with the school principal. If you
continue to have concerns, you can discuss with the Chairperson of your Board
of Management.

The allocation of special education teachers is provided on the basis that no
child will be refused enrolment on the grounds that the school does not have
sufficient teaching resources to meet that child’s needs. If your child is
refused enrolment to a school you may [ appeal this decision to a Section 29
Appeal Committee ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/90de23-appeal-against-
permanent-exclusion-suspension-or-refusal-to-enrol/) .

##  Special needs assistants

Special needs assistants (SNAs) are allocated to schools to work with children
who have specific care needs. They provide non-teaching care support.

SNAs support pupils who have care needs resulting from a disability,
behavioural difficulties or a significant medical issue. This might include a
significant impairment of physical or sensory function or where their
behaviour makes them a danger to themselves or other pupils.

Pupil's needs can vary. A pupil may need an assistant for a few hours each
week (for example, to help feed or change or bring them to the toilet) or they
may require a full-time assistant.

SNAs may work with more than one child and can also work on a part-time basis.
Schools allocate SNA support to ensure that students with the greatest need
get the greatest level of support.

The Department of Education has published:

  * Arrangements for the [ allocation of special needs assistants in mainstream schools for 2023-2024 (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/255300/feb530f8-16b6-489f-bd21-446336c8f583.pdf#page=null)
  * An [ information hub for SNAs ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/2a977-special-needs-assistant-sna/) on Gov.ie, which has information on recruitment and appointment, training and development, and other resources for SNAs 
  * More information about the [ Special Needs Assistants Scheme in Circular 0030/2014 (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/13324/62fdf3b19c674eab80fd98468a00290a.pdf) . 

The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) has published an information
booklet for parents of [ children with special educational needs (pdf)
](http://ncse.ie/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/ChildrenWithSpecialEdNeeds1.pdf) .

##  Home Tuition Scheme

The [ Home Tuition Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d15f58-home-
tuition/) provides funding to parents to provide education at home for
children who (for a number of reasons, such as chronic illness) are unable to
attend school. The scheme is also available to children with special
educational needs who are awaiting a suitable educational placement.

##  Summer education programme

The [ Summer Programme ](/en/education/special-education-needs/summer-
education-programme/) (also called _July Provision_ ) provides funding for
special schools and mainstream primary schools with special classes to extend
their education services during the summer holiday period. The funding may
also cover transport for the children.

A [ home-based summer programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a0e87-summer-provision-home-based-
programme/) is available to certain children, if their school is not
participating in the Summer Programme or cannot offer them a place.

##  Irish Sign Language (ISL) scheme

The [ Irish Sign Language (ISL) scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/3283c-irish-sign-language-isl-scheme/) is
for children who are Deaf and are attending primary school, post-primary
school or special school and whose main means of communication is using Irish
Sign Language. Children must be attending a recognised school.

The National Council for Special Education Needs (NCSE) manages the scheme
which provides:

  * An ISL Specialist Classroom Support (ISL-SCS) for individual students to help access teaching and learning. 
  * An ISL Advisor who can provide training and support for schools and staff to communicate using ISL 

The [ first phase of the scheme supports children attending mainstream schools
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/4de54-ministers-foley-and-madigan-
announce-implementation-of-the-first-phase-of-isl-scheme/) .

You apply through your child’s school for the ISL Scheme. The school applies
to the NCSE.

The scheme is being introduced on a phased basis and is offered in addition to
provision already in place for the student.

Find out more about [ how to qualify for the ISL Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/4de54-ministers-foley-and-madigan-
announce-implementation-of-the-first-phase-of-isl-scheme/) .

##  Visiting Teacher Service

The [ Visiting Teacher Service ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/educational-supports/visiting-teacher-service/) provides a teaching
and support service to parents of deaf or hard-of-hearing children and
children with visual impairment.

##  Other supports

####  **Speech and language disorder**

Special classes for pupils with specific speech and language disorder are
attached to mainstream primary schools. Pupils who meet specific criteria may
be eligible for such classes. The Department sets out the [ criteria for
Enrolment in Special Classes for Pupils with Specific Speech and Language
Disorder (Word doc). ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/14776/b7bfe9ed47824285a55184b83b050b3c.doc)

Schools may apply to the Special Educational Needs Organiser to establish
these classes. Schools must have at least 5 eligible pupils to retain a class.
A full-time teacher is assigned to each special class with a pupil to teacher
ratio of 7:1. Eligible pupils may spend up to 2 years in a special class. An
enhanced capitation grant is paid for each pupil enrolled in these classes.

The Health Service Executive funds the [ speech and language therapy services
](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/speech-and-language-
therapy-services/) for the children attending these classes.

If a school has such a class and there are places to spare, these places may
be offered to a maximum of 2 pupils who do not meet the eligibility criteria
but who could benefit from enrolment in the class. The offer of a place must
be supported by the recommendation of a speech and language therapist and/or a
psychologist.

In general, a child who is eligible for placement in a special class is also
eligible for [ free transport ](/en/education/special-education-needs/school-
transport-for-children-with-special-needs/) to their nearest class.

Pupils who meet the criteria for classes may also qualify for additional
teaching support (even if there is a special class available). You may apply
for this support to the Special Educational Needs Organiser - see 'How to
apply' below.

Pupils with mild speech and language difficulties may qualify for teaching
support from the school’s general allocation of teaching resources as outlined
above.

####  **Autism**

Children on the autistic spectrum may avail of special needs education in the
same way as other children with special needs. There are also specific
provisions for them.

There are a number of special classes for children with autism, which are
attached to special and mainstream schools, as well as several special classes
for children with Asperger’s Syndrome. There are early intervention classes
(attached to some primary schools) for children of pre-school age who are on
the autistic spectrum.

The [ Home Tuition Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d15f58-home-
tuition/) funds home programmes for pre-school children on the autistic
spectrum who need early educational intervention. The grant aid is for 10
hours' home tuition a week for children aged 2½ to 3 and 20 hours a week for
children aged 3. The funding is not provided if there is a place in school or
early education available to the child.

There are also a number of stand-alone facilities providing an applied
behavioural analysis (ABA) specific methodology.

####  **Dyslexia**

There are [ 4 special reading schools ](https://dyslexia.ie/info-hub/reading-
schools-and-classes/) . There are also special classes attached to some
mainstream primary schools which support the needs of children with dyslexia.
They have a reduced pupil/teacher ratio of 9:1 and an increased level of
capitation grant.

####  **Hearing impairment**

There are [ 3 schools for students with hearing impairment
](https://www.irishdeafsociety.ie/information-for-parents/educational-
options/) . There are also special classes attached to some mainstream
schools. The special classes have a pupil to teacher ratio of 7:1. Schools can
access enhanced funding and grant aid towards special equipment.

There is a weekly home tuition Irish Sign Language Support Scheme for deaf
pre-school children and deaf school going pupils to provide training in Irish
Sign Language (ISL) for these children, their siblings and parents.

####  **Nursing supports to attend school**

The HSE and the NCSE are running a new [ pilot scheme putting nursing supports
in place for children with complex healthcare needs to attend school
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/cf321-national-nursing-pilot-for-children-
with-complex-healthcare-needs-pilot-scheme/) . You can find more about [
applying for the pilot scheme ](https://ncse.ie/national-nursing-programme-
pilot-for-children-with-complex-healthcare-needs) .

####  **Assessment of education needs**

The [ Disability Act 2005
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2005/act/14/enacted/en/html) provides for
an Assessment of Need to identify your child's health needs and what health
services are needed to meet these needs. It is an assessment carried out by
the HSE for children or young people with a disability.

Since 2021, the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) must nominate a
person to carry out an assessment of education needs on behalf of the HSE when
an Assessment of Need is in process. Find out more about the [ Assessment of
Need for children or young people with a disability ](/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-
people-with-disabilites/) .

##  More information

If your child has special educational needs, you should talk to the school
principal about the type of education that would suit your child's needs. You
can also discuss with your local [ Special Educational Needs Organiser
](http://ncse.ie/faqs) what learning supports or additional resources may be
available.

Schools should apply to the National Council for Special Education (NCSE)
which administers and processes applications for special educational resources
using its network of Special Educational Needs Organisers.

[ Application forms for special educational resources ](http://ncse.ie/for-
schools) and [ a list of Special Educational Needs Organisers
](https://ncse.ie/special-educational-needs-organiser-seno) are available on
the NCSE website.

Application forms for the [ Home Tuition Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d15f58-home-tuition/) are on the website of
the Department of Education.

You apply for the [ home-based Summer Programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a0e87-summer-provision-home-based-
programme/) through your child's school.

You can get information about [ applying for the pilot nursing supports to
attend school scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/cf321-national-
nursing-pilot-for-children-with-complex-healthcare-needs-pilot-scheme/) .

###  National Council for Special Education

1-2 Mill Street  
Trim  
Meath  
C15 P2KC  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 6033200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ncse.ie/ ](http://www.ncse.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 6 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Special%20needs%20education%20in%20primary%20schools&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Special%20needs%20education%20in%20primary%20schools&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Special needs education: post-primary_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/post-primary-education-for-students-with-special-needs/)

This document describes post-primary education for students with disabilities.

3496.3289

  * [ _Special educational needs_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-education/)

This page describes the special arrangements for the education of children
with special educational needs.

3131.3442

  * [ _The law on special educational needs_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/the-law-on-special-educational-needs/)

This page covers the law covering special educational needs. This is complex
and is spread across the Irish Constitution and other pieces of legislation.

2864.341

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

