**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Pre-school education and childcare ](/en/education/pre-school-education-
and-childcare/) > Your childcare options

#  Your childcare options

  * Choosing childcare 
  * Types of childcare 
  * Financial supports for childcare 
  * How much does childcare cost? 
  * Where to find childcare 
  * More information 

##  Choosing childcare

Deciding on childcare is a big decision for any parent. There are a number of
factors you need to consider.

These include:

  * Your child’s age 
  * Whether you need full-time or part-time care 
  * The hours you need services (regular, daytime, evenings or weekends) 
  * Your budget 
  * Services available in your area 

It is important to discuss with the childcare service provider your child’s
needs and the service they can provide. You should check that staff are
qualified, and the provider has appropriate childcare policies and procedures
in place (for example, policies for child protection, behaviour management,
and accidents).

###  **Research before choosing a childcare provider**

If you are thinking of choosing a childcare provider, you should visit them
when there are children present, so you can get a sense of the atmosphere and
see how they operate.

It is also important to check fees, hours, and holiday periods.

You can find information about childcare in Ireland from the following
organisations:

####  **Tusla, the Child and Family Agency**

Pre-school and school-age childcare facilities are regulated and inspected by
[ Tusla, the Child and Family Agency
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/) .

Tusla has a list of [ tips on choosing a pre-school
](http://www.tusla.ie/services/preschool-services/tips-for-parents) and a [
database of childcare inspection reports
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/preschool-services/creche-inspection-reports/)
.

You may also want to read our pages about the:

  * [ Regulation of pre-school childcare services ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-childcare-services/)
  * [ Regulation of school-age childcare services ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-childcare/)

####  **Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth**

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth
(DCEDIY) has published a [ list of early years recognised qualifications (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/239042/?page=null) for childcare programmes.

You can also use the [ Childcare Service Search tool
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/14695-childcare-service-search/) on
Gov.ie.

####  **City or County Childcare Committee**

Your [ City or County Childcare Committee ](https://myccc.ie/) can give you a
list of childcare providers in your area. They can also put you in touch with
your local early years or pre-school inspector (see 'Where to find childcare'
below).

##  Types of childcare

Childcare services can differ in their opening hours, management structures,
and the curriculum they use (read about [ early childhood education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/early-childhood-education/) ). Some services also vary depending on
staff training and the needs of parents in your area.

Childcare options include:

  * Full day care and part-time day care 
  * Sessional services 
  * Childminders 
  * Parent, baby and toddler groups 
  * Drop-in centres 
  * School-age childcare 

###  **Full day care**

Full day care is a structured service for children attending more than 5 hours
per day.

The childcare provider offers your child food and sleeping facilities, as well
as access to a safe outdoor space.

Full day care includes day nurseries and crèches. It can sometimes include
sessional services for children who aren’t attending full-time (see ‘sessional
services’ below).

###  **Part-time day care**

Part-time day care is a structured service for children attending more than
3.5 hours and less than 5 hours per day. The childcare provider must offer the
same rest, play, and sanitary facilities as it does for children attending
full day care.

Part-time day care services may include Montessori groups, pre-schools,
crèches, and playgroups.

###  **Sessional services**

There are different types of sessional childcare services for children aged
0-6. These offer a planned programme of up to 3.5 hours per session (such as a
morning or an afternoon).

Providers of sessional childcare services must have a recognised childcare
qualification.

**Types of sessional services** **Montessori groups** |  Children learn at their own pace by choosing their own activities from developmentally-appropriate options   
---|---  
**Naíonraí** |  Nursery schools or playschools that operate through the Irish language   
**Playgroups** |  Community groups which focus on play and socialising   
**Playschools or pre-schools** |  Children can play with other children of a similar age, learn to share and take turns, and learn to understand the rules of the classroom (such as listening)   
  
###  **Childminders**

Childminders care for children in the minder’s own home. A childminder can
care for up to 5 children under 6 years of age (including the childminder’s
own).

The service is usually offered for the full working day, or for different
periods during the day. Parents and childminders arrange their own terms and
conditions.

####  **Childminding Development Grant**

Childminders can apply for [ Childminding Development Grants
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/71b16-grants-and-funding-available/) from
their [ local City or County Childcare Committee (CCC)
](https://myccc.ie/where-is-my-nearest-ccc) . The grant provides up to €1,000
to help childminders providing services in their own home. It can be used to
buy toys, educational items, childcare equipment, safety equipment, and IT
equipment.

You can read a [ guide to becoming a childminder (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/128614/c62e56d6-a51f-4b57-8efa-6f8e73c0b142.pdf) ,
which was developed as part of the National Action Plan for Childminding
2021-2028.

####  **Tax relief**

There is a [ childminder’s tax relief ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-
tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/children/childcare-services/index.aspx) for
childminders who look after up to 3 children in the minder’s own home.

###  **Parent, baby and toddler groups**

[ Parent, baby and toddler groups ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-
children/parenting-advice/services-supports/parent-baby-toddler-groups/) are
where a group of parents, guardians or carers and children come together for
supervised play and companionship for their parents.

###  **Drop-in centres**

A drop-in centre offers a service for short periods during the day. These
centres are often provided in shopping centres, leisure centres and
accommodation facilities.

The service is provided as part of a customer or client service and children
are looked after while the parent is availing of a service or attending an
event.

###  **School-age childcare**

Services for schoolchildren can include:

  * Breakfast clubs 
  * After-school clubs 
  * School holiday programmes (such as summer camps) 

Some services also offer homework supervision, planned activities, or
nutritious meals.

School-age childcare services must be registered with Tusla. Read more about
the [ regulation of school-age childcare
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/regulation-of-school-age-childcare/) .

##  Financial supports for childcare

###  **National Childcare Scheme**

The [ National Childcare Scheme (NCS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/) helps parents to meet childcare costs.

Families with children aged over 6 months (24 weeks) and under 15 years can
get childcare subsidies.

Your childcare provider must be:

  * [ Registered with Tusla ](https://www.ncs.gov.ie/en/childcare-search/) , and 
  * Have a NCS contract with the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) 

You [ apply for the subsidy
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/#16f160) , but it is paid directly to your
childcare provider. Your provider will then subtract the subsidy from your
childcare bill.

There is a **universal subsidy** and an **income-assessed subsidy** . You
can’t get both subsidies at the same time, but you can choose which one is
better for you.

####  **Universal childcare subsidy**

The [ universal childcare subsidy
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/universal-childcare-subsidy/) is available to parents of any income
level and is not means-tested. The [ subsidy rates
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/universal-childcare-subsidy/#06c10b) are based on the number of
hours your child is attending childcare.

####  **Income-assessed subsidy**

The income-assessed subsidy is available to families with an annual reckonable
income of up to €60,000. It is means-tested.

The [ subsidy rates ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/national-childcare-scheme/#de49ac) are based
on:

  * Your reckonable family income 
  * The age of your child 
  * The educational stage of your child. 

You can use the [ subsidy calculator ](https://www.ncs.gov.ie/en/childcare-
subsidy-calculator-input/) on the NCS website to help you work out what your
entitlement will be.

####  **Community Childcare Subvention Plus Saver Programme**

The [ Community Childcare Subvention Plus (CCSP) Saver Programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/community-childcare-subvention-programme/) helps parents on lower
incomes, and parents in education or training, to access childcare at a
reduced cost from Tusla-registered childcare services. The CCSP Saver
Programme is closed to new applicants.

Read more about the subsidies available [ on the National Childcare Scheme
website ](https://www.ncs.gov.ie/en/) .

###  **Early Childhood Care and Education Scheme (ECCE)**

The [ Early Childhood Care and Education Scheme (ECCE)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-scheme/) is a universal free
preschool programme. Eligible children can use the scheme for up to 2 years
before starting primary school.

###  **Early Start Programme**

The [ Early Start Programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/early-start/) is a one-year pre-school project offered in selected
schools in some disadvantaged areas. It is for children aged between 3 and 5
who are at risk of not reaching their potential in school.

A child cannot be enrolled in both ECCE and Early Start at the same time.

##  How much does childcare cost?

Childcare costs depend on:

  * The type of childcare you choose 
  * The number of hours your child is cared for 
  * The level of staff training in that facility. 

Pre-school education provided under the [ Early Childhood Care and Education
Scheme (ECCE) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-
education-and-childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-scheme/) is free
for 3 hours a day, 5 days a week, 38 weeks of the year. If your child attends
for more than 3 hours, you will be charged for the extra time.

##  Where to find childcare

You can find information about childcare providers from a number of different
sources.

You can contact:

  * Your local [ City or County Childcare Committee ](https://myccc.ie/) , who will have a list of childcare providers in your area 
  * The [ Tusla Early Years Inspector ](http://www.tusla.ie/get-in-touch/early-years-inspectors/) , who will have information about local childcare services 
  * [ Public health nurses ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/public-health-nurses/) at your [ local health centre ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/healthcentres/) , who will often be familiar with local services and childminders 

You can also find a [ list of contracted childcare providers
](https://www.ncs.gov.ie/en/childcare-search/) on the National Childcare
Scheme website.

##  More information

You can read more about early learning and childcare supports [ on the
Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth’s (DCEDIY)
information hub
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/5ab17-childcare/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/childcare/)
.

You can also read about:

  * The [ National Action Plan for Childminding 2021-2028 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/df207-national-action-plan-for-childminding-2021-2028/)
  * The [ Whole-of-Government Strategy for Babies, Young Children and their Families 2019-2028 (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/31184/62acc54f4bdf4405b74e53a4afb8e71b.pdf)

You can visit the HSE website for [ information about services and supports
for parents ](https://www2.hse.ie/babies-children/parenting-advice/services-
supports/) .

_**Page edited:** 26 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/your-childcare-
options/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Your%20childcare%20options&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/your-childcare-
options/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/your-childcare-
options/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Your%20childcare%20options&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/your-childcare-
options/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of pre-school childcare services_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-childcare-services/)

Pre-school childcare providers are regulated by law. Find out about the rules
concerning play groups, day nurseries,crèches, childminders and other service
providers.

1084.6189

  * [ _Regulation of school age childcare services_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-childcare/)

School age childcare providers are regulated by law. Find out about the rules
that apply to childcare services providing care to school age children.

855.08545

  * [ _National Childcare Scheme (NCS)_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/national-childcare-scheme/)

The National Childcare Scheme (NCS) is a new scheme that provides financial
support to help parents to meet the costs of childcare.

790.96326

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

