**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to primary school ](/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/) > Ownership of primary
schools

#  Ownership of primary schools

  * Introduction 
  * The school patron 
  * Funding of schools 
  * Running costs of schools 

##  Introduction

Many primary schools in Ireland are owned and supported by the different
churches. The State pays the bulk of the building and running costs. Also, a
local contribution is often made towards the running costs.

In the case of Catholic and Church of Ireland schools, the owners are usually
the diocesan trustees. Other denominational schools usually have a board of
trustees nominated by the church authorities. Multi-denominational schools are
usually owned by a limited company or board of trustees.

Where primary schools are owned by the religious denominations. There are
deeds of trust signed by the owners, which ensure that the school will
continue to be used as such.

Gaelscoileanna may be denominational and come under the same patronage as
Catholic schools, but some have their own limited company. You can get more
information in our document about different [ types of primary schools.
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-
school/choosing-a-primary-school/)

The special schools have a range of different owners - some are owned by the [
Department of Education, ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-
education/) some by the Commissioners of Public Works, some by the [ Health
Service Executive ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) and
some by religious orders.

There are a small number of 'model schools', which are owned by the State.

The Department of Education is supporting the establishment of
multidenominational schools with the transfer of patronage from certain
Catholic schools. The Department has published [ information about the
transfer of patronage and the change of ethos in schools
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/811e2-schools-reconfiguration-for-
diversity/) .

##  The school patron

The [ Education Act 1998
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0051/index.html) gives a
statutory basis to the role of the patron and sets out the rules for
determining who the patron is. The patron may manage the school personally or
may appoint a board of management to act as manager. Under the Act the patron
has the power to remove the board and take over managing the school or appoint
another board.

A register of patrons is kept by the Department of Education so it is possible
for anyone to check exactly who the patron of any national school is.

In general, the patron of a school is representative of the owners and can be
an individual or a group. For example:

  * If the Catholic and Church of Ireland bishops are the patrons of the schools within the diocese, with the parish priest usually carrying out the functions on behalf of the bishop. 
  * The patron of a multi-denominational school is usually the board of trustees or the limited company [ Educate Together ](http://www.educatetogether.ie/) . 
  * Gaelscoileanna may be under the patronage of the church authorities but may opt to be under the patronage of [ Foras Pátrúnachta na Scoileanna Lán-Ghaeilge, ](http://www.foras.ie/) which is a limited company set up for the purpose. 

##  Funding of schools

Traditionally, the site for national schools was provided locally - either
directly by the patron or as a result of local fundraising. There was also a
local contribution to the building costs and the running costs. Changes were
made over the years as multi-denominational schools and Gaelscoileanna were
being built and did not have a 'local' funding base.

Private primary schools get no State funding.

###  Cost of site - new primary schools

The State pays the full cost of the site. The patron still has the choice of
funding the site cost. If the State pays, then the State owns the school
building and leases it to the patron under a lease or a deed of trust.

If the patron pays, the patron owns the school. If the State pays, it does not
change who the patron is.

The Education Act 1998 clarifies and restates the fact that the [ board of
management ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-
primary-school/boards-of-management/) does not acquire any right over or
interest in the land or buildings of the school for which it has
responsibility.

###  Gaelscoileanna

The funding for new Gaelscoileanna is now on the same basis as other new
schools. The previous arrangement continues for Gaelscoileanna that have
either permanent or provisional recognition from the Department of Education.
The previous arrangement for Gaelscoileanna meant that the Department bought
the site and paid the full building cost. Where Gaelscoileanna are in rented
accommodation and the state pays the rent.

[ Gaelscoileanna Teo ](http://www.gaelscoileanna.ie/) is a voluntary body
(supported by An Foras Teanga), which is the co-ordinating body for Irish
language schools and helps parents to set up new Gaelscoileanna.

##  Running costs of schools

The State pays a direct capitation grant per student to each primary school.
The State pays the teachers' salaries. Enhanced capitation grants are paid for
children with special educational needs in special schools or who attend
special classes in mainstream schools. Capitation grants are used for the day-
to-day running of schools and for teaching materials and resources.

Primary schools also receive a grant for caretaking and secretarial services
(called the Ancillary Services Grant Scheme). A local contribution was
formerly required but has now been abolished.

Each school also receives a book grant.

Each school gets a grant towards the cost of minor works.

Some schools qualify for enhanced funding under various schemes for  tackling
disadvantage in primary schools  such as DEIS and [ Early Start
](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/early-start/) .

_**Page edited:** 23 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Ownership%20of%20primary%20schools&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Ownership%20of%20primary%20schools&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-
schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Boards of management in primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/boards-of-management/)

This document describes the rules governing boards of management of primary
schools

1875.1578

  * [ _Special needs education in primary schools_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-needs-education-primary-schools/)

The arrangements for special needs education in primary schools include
learning support and resource teachers, and special needs assistants.

1589.094

  * [ _Admissions policies in primary and secondary schools_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/)

Explains the rules about admissions policies in schools in Ireland and changes
under the Education (Admission to Schools) Act 2018.

1453.3181

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

