**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to post-primary school ](/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/) > Resources for
parents and students at post-primary school

#  Resources for parents and students at post-primary school

  * Introduction 
  * The curriculum in schools 
  * Safety and welfare 
  * Parent and student advocacy 
  * Languages in school 

##  Introduction

You may find the websites and list of organisations on this page helpful if
your child is starting secondary-level education for the first time.

The resources may also be useful if you are [ moving to Ireland ](/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/) or [ returning to Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning_to_ireland/) soon and are
looking for [ information on the post-primary or secondary-level education
system ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/) in Ireland.

##  The curriculum in schools

###  Curriculum online

The [ website of the National Council for Curriculum and Assessment
](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/) has information on the curriculum and
subjects up to Senior Cycle.

You can find useful resources and news about what is happening in education,
including new subjects, subjects under review and changes to the Junior and
Senior cycle.

You should contact a school directly to find out about the subjects they offer
students.

###  **Scoilnet**

[ Scoilnet ](http://www.scoilnet.ie/) is the official education portal of the
Department of Education. It provides information and advice to students,
teachers and parents.

Scoilnet has resources on a wide range of school subjects evaluated by subject
matter experts so they are relevant to the curricula.

###  **Home Education Network**

If you choose to [ teach your child at home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/home-education/) , the [ Home Education Network
](http://www.henireland.org/) (HEN) may be a good source of information. It is
a support and lobby group for home educators in Ireland. It aims to help
parents use available resources to develop educational techniques suitable for
each child’s needs.

The network provides a forum for members to exchange ideas and experience
through regular meetings and newsletters. Its website has links to research
and online information about home education. HEN also has a library service of
books on home education for members.

##  Safety and welfare

###  **Spunout.ie**

[ Spunout.ie ](https://spunout.ie/) is Ireland’s youth information website. It
provides information and support for young people on education, employment,
health, and life events.

Its articles on education include advice on moving from school to college,
everything you need to know about CAO offers and how to handle exam stress. It
also has a [ chat service for questions about CAO offers
](https://spunout.ie/education/leaving-cert-cao/yic-have-a-question-about-
your-cao-offers) .

###  **Webwise**

[ Webwise.ie ](https://www.webwise.ie/) provides advice and resources for
parents and teachers on internet safety.

Parents can access expert advice and information on the latest apps and social
networks. It has a how-to guide on setting up parental controls on its [
parents’ hub ](https://www.webwise.ie/parents/) .

It has a range of secondary-level teaching resources to address cyberbullying,
non-consensual image-sharing, social media and developing digital citizenship
skills on its [ teachers hub ](https://www.webwise.ie/teachers/) .

You can find more information on [ bullying in schools
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-
in-schools/bullying-in-schools-in-ireland/) .

##  Parent and student advocacy

**National Parents Council Post Primary**

The [ National Parents Council - Post Primary (NPCpp) ](http://www.npcpp.ie/)
is a nationwide organisation that represents the interests of parents with
children in secondary education.

The NPCpp aims to:

  * Involve parents in all aspects of their children’s education 
  * Provide a voice for parents in the development of parent groups 
  * Take a role in influencing national policy on education 

The NPCpp also works as an umbrella organisation for parents associations in
secondary schools. It aims to have an effective parents association in place
in every school.

###  Irish Second-Level Students Union

The [ Irish Second-Level Students Union (ISSU) ](http://www.uss.ie/) is the
national representative body for school student councils.

It aims to:

  * Represent and connect second-level students throughout Ireland 
  * Empower students through training, guidance and advice to become actively involved in decision-making in their school communities 
  * Work with other organisations to bring the views of second-level school students on educational issues to the attention of policy-makers and the media 
  * Strive for innovation and democracy within the education system. 

###  The Teaching Council

The [ Teaching Council ](http://www.teachingcouncil.ie/) promotes and
regulates professional standards in teaching in Ireland.

The Teaching Council produces a code of professional conduct for teachers
which includes standards of teaching, knowledge, skill and competence.

##  Languages in school

Generally, children are required to study Irish in school. Some children may
be [ exempted from learning Irish in school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/exemption-from-irish/) .

###  **Gaeloideachas**

[ Gaeloideachas ](https://gaeloideachas.ie/) is the main co-ordinating body
for education through Irish for pre-school, primary and secondary schools. It
aims to advance the use of Irish as the language of instruction at all levels
in schools around the country.

Gaeloideachas provides support to parents who want their children educated
through Irish, and to local committees who want to establish all-Irish schools
in their own locality. It provides information in multiple languages on [
reasons to choose a Gaelcholaiste ](https://gaeloideachas.ie/document/reasons-
to-choose-a-gaelcholaiste/) (secondary school).

###  **Foras na Gaeilge**

[ Foras na Gaeilge ](http://www.gaeilge.ie/?lang=en) promotes and advises on
the Irish language throughout the island of Ireland.

Foras na Gaeilge provides teaching resources to Irish teachers who want to
update their skills. It provides a list of [ Irish language lead organisations
](https://www.forasnagaeilge.ie/irish-language-lead-organisations/?lang=en) .

###  Languages connect

[ LanguagesConnect.ie ](https://languagesconnect.ie/) is a resource for
schools and students that helps to spread awareness of the benefits of
language learning. It is part of Ireland’s [ Strategy for Foreign Languages in
Education 2017-2026 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/52f94d-framework-for-
consultation-on-a-foreign-languages-in-education-strat/) . The website has
separate sections for [ students and teachers
](https://languagesconnect.ie/students/) , [ parents
](https://languagesconnect.ie/parents/) , and [ businesses
](https://languagesconnect.ie/business/) .

###  English as a second language

The Department of Education provides additional educational [ resources to
schools for pupils who are learning English as an additional language (EAL
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/educational-supports/resources-for-non-english-speakers/) ).

_**Page edited:** 20 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-
resources-for-post-primary-schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Resources%20for%20parents%20and%20students%20at%20post-
primary%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-
resources-for-post-primary-schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-
resources-for-post-primary-schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Resources%20for%20parents%20and%20students%20at%20post-
primary%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-
resources-for-post-primary-schools/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1568.6512

  * [ _School transport for post-primary students_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-transport-scheme/)

The Department of Education provides subsidised school transport for eligible
post-primary students.

1560.9279

  * [ _Admissions policies in primary and secondary schools_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/)

Explains the rules about admissions policies in schools in Ireland and changes
under the Education (Admission to Schools) Act 2018.

1485.9895

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

