**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [ Types
of employment ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/) > [ Self-employment
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/) > Employing people in
your business

#  Employing people in your business

  * Hiring employees 
  * Register as an employer with Revenue 
  * Paying wages and deducting tax 
  * Your employees’ rights and entitlements 
  * Staff working abroad 
  * Grants and support to hire staff 
  * More information about employing staff 

##  Hiring employees

If you start a business and plan to employ staff, you must follow Ireland’s
employment laws. You should be aware of your responsibilities as an employer
before you hire any staff, for example, in relation to contracts and health
and safety in the workplace.

This page explains what you need to know about employing people when starting
a business.

##  Register as an employer with Revenue

If you hire staff, you must register as an employer with Revenue before you
pay the employee. You can do this by telling Revenue your name, address and
intention to pay staff through the MyEnquiries tab on the [ Revenue Online
Service (ROS) ](https://www.ros.ie/) .

If you do not register as an employer, but Revenue believes that you are
acting as an employer, they will register you. You will get a formal notice of
registration from Revenue, and you have 14 days to challenge this in writing.

##  Paying wages and deducting tax

###  **Paying wages**

You must pay your employees at least the [ minimum wage, which is
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment_rights_and_conditions/pay_and_employment/pay_inc_min_wage.html)
currently €11.30 per hour. If you do not pay the minimum rate of pay, you can
be fined up to €2,500 or imprisoned for up to six months.

Be mindful that some sectors, such as the security sector and construction
sector, have different rates of pay. Read more about the rules for certain
sectors in our page [ employment agreements and orders
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-agreements-and-
orders/) .

You can also read about [ contracts and terms of employment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employer-obligations/#33df5d) .

###  **Deducting tax**

You must deduct tax from your employee’s wages through the Pay As You Earn
(PAYE) system, and then pay this to Revenue using the [ Revenue Online Service
](https://www.ros.ie/) .

The amount of tax you deduct depends on the amount of income they earn and on
their personal circumstances. Read about [ how income tax is calculated
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-
tax-is-calculated/) .

Tax deductions include:

  * Income Tax 
  * [ Pay-Related Social Insurance (PRSI) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/paying-your-employees-tax-to-revenue/prsi.aspx)
  * [ Universal Social Charge (USC) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/usc/index.aspx)
  * [ Local Property Tax ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/index.aspx) (if applicable) 

You must deduct tax on or before the date you pay your employee. You must then
[ report the pay and deductions to Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/becoming-an-employer-and-ongoing-
obligations/information-on-payroll-submission/index.aspx) .

Remember to [ give employees a payslip
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/pay-slip/) with every payment of their wages.
The payslip should set out the worker’s gross pay and any deductions from that
pay.

Read more about your [ tax obligations as a business owner
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/understanding-your-tax-
as-a-business-owner/) .

If this is not the employee’s first employment in Ireland, you must register
their new employment with Revenue.

###  **Occupational pensions**

You do not have to provide a [ pension scheme for employees
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/occupational-pensions/) (often called ‘occupational
pensions’).

However, if you do not offer an occupational pension scheme, or if certain
restrictions apply to your scheme, you must give your employees access to at
least one standard [ Personal Retirement Savings Account (PRSA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/personal-retirement-savings-accounts/) .

Read the [ Consumer and Employers’ Guide to PRSAs (pdf)
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/en/i_want_to_start_a_pension_prsa/prsas/prsas_a_consumer_and_employers_guide.pdf)
from the Pensions Authority.

##  Your employees’ rights and entitlements

As an employer, you must give your employees access to all their rights and
entitlements.

Read about your employees’ rights in relation to:

  * [ Contracts of employment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/)
  * [ Pay ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/)
  * [ Hours of work and breaks ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/hours-of-work/)
  * [ Statutory leave, including holidays ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/)
  * [ Health and safety ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/)
  * [ Industrial relations and trade unions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/)
  * [ Data protection at work ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/)

You can also find out about [ Ireland’s employment laws
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment_rights_and_conditions/employment_rights_and_duties/employment_law_update.html)
and your [ responsibilities as an employer
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment_rights_and_conditions/employment_rights_and_duties/employer_obligations.html)
.

##  Staff working abroad

If your employee has the right to work in Ireland but they live and work for
you abroad, Revenue may give you a [ PAYE Exclusion Order
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/what-constitutes-pay/paye-
exclusion-order-issued-by-revenue/index.aspx) . If eligible, you do not have
to deduct income tax and USC from this employee.

You may also qualify for a PAYE Exclusion Order if your employee carries out
incidental duties in Ireland for up to 30 days per year. To apply for a PAYE
Exclusion Order, [ your employee needs a PPS number
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/irish_social_welfare_system/personal_public_service_number.html)
.

You do not need to pay PAYE, or apply for a PAYE Exclusion Order, if your
employee meets all of the following:

  * They are not a director of your company 
  * They have no income tax liability in Ireland 
  * They carry out all their duties abroad 

Directors of Irish companies must pay tax in Ireland regardless of their
residency status.

###  **Bringing staff to Ireland**

EEA, UK and Swiss nationals have the right to live and work in Ireland without
a visa or immigration permission. Non-EEA, UK and Swiss nationals need a valid
work permit to work in Ireland. Read about the [ different types of work
permits
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving_country/working_in_ireland/employment_permits/overview_employment_permits.html)
.

It is a criminal offence to knowingly employ a person aged 16 or over who does
not have permission to live and work in Ireland. You can be fined or
imprisoned for committing this offence.

##  Grants and support to hire staff

###  **Work Placement Experience Programme**

The [ Work Placement Experience Programme (WPEP)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/95fe1-work-placement-experience-programme/)
allows employers to host a jobseeker on a work experience placement, to help
the jobseeker build new skills and get work experience.

There is no cost to the employer. The participant will be paid by the
Department of Social Protection during their work placement.

###  **JobsPlus**

Employers who employ [ jobseekers from the live register
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/signing-on/) on a full-time basis, get regular
grant payments to help balance wage costs.

###  **Wage Subsidy Scheme for people with disabilities**

The [ Wage Subsidy Scheme for people with disabilities
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment_and_disability/grant_aid_scheme_for_employers_with_disabled_staff.html)
is available to **private sector** employers who employ workers with a
disability. You must be able to employ workers with a disability between 21
and 39 hours per week.

###  **Disability Awareness Training**

Employers in the private sector can get a grant to provide [ Disability
Awareness Training
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/-disability-awareness-support-scheme/) for their staff.

##  More information about employing staff

Read the Workplace Relations Commission’s [ guide for employers who are
starting a new business with a paid employee (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/guide_to_employment_labour_and_equality_law_18.pdf)
.

You can also read:

  * [ Step-by-step guide to setting up a business in Ireland ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/step-by-step-guide-to-setting-up-a-business-in-ireland/)
  * [ How to write a business plan ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/how-to-write-a-business-plan/)
  * [ How to register a business name ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/becoming-self-employed/#ad8994)
  * [ Deciding on the legal structure of your business ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/#9960e7)
  * [ Understanding your tax obligations ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/understanding-your-tax-as-a-business-owner/)
  * [ Closing a business ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/closing-a-business/)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 14 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/employing-people-in-your-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employing%20people%20in%20your%20business&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/employing-people-in-your-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/employing-people-in-your-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employing%20people%20in%20your%20business&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-
of-employment/self-employment/employing-people-in-your-
business/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Information on starting your own business_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/finding-information-on-starting-business/)

This page explains where to find information on starting a business, including
the organisations and agencies that can help.

1523.4097

  * [ _Closing your business_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/closing-a-business/)

Find out about important considerations when you decide to sell or close your
business.

1507.5073

  * [ _Understanding your tax as a business owner_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/understanding-your-tax-as-a-business-owner/)

If you own a business, you must make sure it is tax compliant and that you
make tax returns annually. This page outlines the tax obligations you must
meet as a sole trader or partnership in Ireland.

1459.6409

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

