**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Maternity leave

#  Maternity leave

  * Introduction 
  * Working during your pregnancy 
  * Maternity leave and pay 
  * Taking your maternity leave 
  * Can I postpone my maternity leave? 
  * How to apply for maternity leave 
  * Maternity leave and your employment rights 
  * Other leave for parents 
  * Returning to work after maternity leave 
  * Having problems taking maternity leave 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

As an employee, you have the right to take 26 weeks’ maternity leave if you
become pregnant. You also have the right to take up to 16 weeks’ additional
maternity leave.

You can take this time off work from full-time, casual or part-time
employment. It does not matter how long you have been working for your
employer.

You must take at least 2 weeks’ maternity leave before your baby is due, and
at least 4 weeks after the baby is born.

If you have enough social insurance (PRSI) contributions, you are entitled to
Maternity Benefit (including self-employed) for the 26 weeks’ of basic
maternity leave. Maternity Benefit does not cover additional maternity leave.

The legislation laws covering this leave are the [ Maternity Protection Acts
1994 and 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1994/act/34/enacted/en/html) .

###  Update to the law

Since 3 July 2023, all the rights and protections outlined below also apply to
transgender men who are pregnant or have given birth. You must have a [ gender
recognition certificate ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/legal-recognition-of-preferred-gender/) , in accordance with the
Gender Recognition Act 2015.

These new rights are set out in the [ Work Life Balance and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act 2023 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/feae1-new-workers-
rights-including-domestic-violence-leave-introduced-under-the-work-life-
balance-bill-passed-by-the-oireachtas/) .

##  Working during your pregnancy

###  Can I take time off for medical visits?

While you are pregnant, you can take time off for medical visits connected
with the pregnancy. You can take as much time off as you need for these
visits, including the time for travelling to and from the appointment and for
the appointment itself.

You must give your employer a note from your doctor to confirm the pregnancy,
and give 2 weeks’ notice of your medical visits. You should show your
appointment card if your employer asks to see it at any time after your first
appointment.

You can also take time off for medical visits, for up to 14 weeks after the
birth. You have the right to be paid while keeping these medical appointments,
both before and after the birth.

###  Can I take time off for antenatal classes?

You can take paid time off work to attend some [ antenatal classes
](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/antenatal-classes/)
. You are entitled to attend one set of antenatal classes except for the last
3 classes of the set. Fathers can take paid time off to attend the last 2
antenatal classes immediately before the birth.

###  When can I take health and safety leave?

Your employer should carry out separate risk assessments when you are
pregnant, have recently given birth or are breastfeeding. They should either
remove any risks or move you away from them. If these options are not
possible, they should give you health and safety leave from work. If you are
pregnant, health and safety leave may continue until you go on maternity
leave.

During health and safety leave, you get your normal wages for the first 3
weeks. After this, you may get [ Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/) from the DSP, depending
on your PRSI contributions. The Health and Safety Authority website has a list
of [ Pregnant at Work FAQs
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Workplace_Health/Sensitive_Risk_Groups/Pregnant_at_Work_Frequently_Asked_Questions/)
.

##  Maternity leave and pay

###  Social welfare

You may be able to get [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/maternity-benefit/) from the Department of Social Protection (DSP) if
you have enough PRSI contributions.

###  **Your employer**

In general, employers do not have to pay women who are on maternity leave.

You should check your contract of employment to see whether you are entitled
to pay and pension contributions from your employer during your maternity
leave.

Your contract could give you the right to pay from your employer in addition
to Maternity Benefit while you are on maternity leave. For example, your
employer may top up the amount you get from Maternity Benefit to match your
normal pay.

###  **What happens to my PRSI contributions?**

When you get Maternity Benefit, you will automatically get [ PRSI credits
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) . To continue getting credits
while you are on unpaid additional maternity leave, you must ask your employer
to complete an [ application form for maternity leave credits (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/70415/a8216143d57b441fa4068a1ba107685b.pdf) after you
return to work.

##  Taking your maternity leave

###  **Starting your maternity leave**

You must start your maternity leave **at least 2 weeks’ before the end of the
week** that your baby is due. The end of the week is normally considered to be
Saturday night. However, you can choose to start it earlier.

####  **Examples**

Trish’s baby is due on Friday 21 June 2024. The **latest date** she should
start her maternity leave is Sunday 9 June 2024.

Kasia’s baby is due on Monday 2 September 2024. The **latest date** she should
start her maternity leave is Sunday 25 August 2024.

###  **Can I take additional maternity leave?**

You can take additional maternity leave for up to 16 more weeks, beginning
immediately after the end of your 26 weeks’ basic maternity leave. Maternity
Benefit does not cover additional maternity leave, and your employer does not
have to pay you during this time.

###  **Stillbirths and miscarriages**

If you have a [ stillbirth or miscarriage ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/) at any time after the 24th week of
pregnancy or your baby has a birth weight of at least 500 grammes, you are
entitled to full maternity leave. This means you can take the basic 26 weeks’
maternity leave and 16 weeks’ additional maternity leave. If you have enough
PRSI contributions, you can get Maternity Benefit for the 26 weeks’ basic
maternity leave.

To apply for Maternity Benefit following a stillbirth or miscarriage, you need
to send a letter from your doctor with the Maternity Benefit application form.
The letter must state the expected date of birth, the actual date of birth and
the number of weeks of pregnancy.

###  **Premature births**

If your baby is born before the date when you are due to start maternity
leave, you can take extra maternity leave. You get 26 weeks’ leave, starting
from the day your baby is born, plus extra leave for the number of weeks
between your baby’s actual date of birth and the date you had planned to start
your maternity leave. Maternity Benefit is payable for the whole of this
extended maternity leave.

**Example – Your baby is born in week 30**

Trish planned to start her maternity leave and Maternity Benefit at week 37 of
her pregnancy, which was 2 weeks before the end of the week when her baby was
due.

However, her baby was born in week 30 of her pregnancy – 7 weeks before she
planned to go on maternity leave and start getting Maternity Benefit. She got
maternity leave for the basic 26 weeks from the date of birth and an extra 7
weeks at the end of those 26 weeks. So Trish’s basic maternity leave and
Maternity Benefit lasted until her baby was about 33 weeks old.

###  **Can fathers take maternity leave?**

Fathers (or the partner of the mother or birthing parent, or in the case of
adoption, the parent who is not taking adoptive leave) can take 2 weeks’ leave
[ paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/paternity-leave/) in the first 6 months after the baby is born or
adopted

Fathers can take maternity leave if the mother or birthing parent dies within
40 weeks of the birth. If they die within 24 weeks of the birth, he can choose
to take the 16 weeks’ additional maternity leave. If the mother or birthing
parent dies more than 24 weeks after the birth, the father can take maternity
leave up until 40 weeks after the birth. The leave starts within 7 days of the
mother or birthing parent’s death.

###  **What happens if I get sick while on maternity leave or additional
maternity leave?**

If you get sick while on maternity leave, you cannot postpone your maternity
leave and take it after your sick leave ends. Maternity leave must be taken in
one continuous block.

Your leave from work due to sickness is treated in the same way as any other [
sick leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/) from work but you are not entitled to take
the rest of your maternity leave after your sick leave ends.

If you become ill while you are on additional maternity leave, you may ask
your employer if you can end the additional maternity leave. If they agree,
they will treat you as being on [ sick leave ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/) . You may
then qualify for [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/illness-benefit/) . However, you cannot take the rest of your
additional maternity leave later – see ‘More information on postponing
maternity leave’ below.

##  Can I postpone my maternity leave?

###  **Can I postpone maternity leave if my baby goes into hospital?**

You may be able to postpone, or delay, maternity leave if your baby goes into
hospital (but not if they are simply unwell).

You should apply to your employer if you want to postpone maternity leave (or
additional maternity leave) and go back to work while your baby is in
hospital. Your employer has the right to refuse.

Fathers who are on maternity leave cannot postpone it.

To request that your maternity leave is postponed, you must have taken at
least 14 weeks’ maternity leave, including 4 weeks after the birth. You can go
back to work and postpone your maternity leave for up to 6 months.

If you postpone your maternity leave and return to work until the baby comes
out of hospital, then you may take your remaining leave in one block. It must
start within 7 days of the baby being discharged from hospital. Your employer
may ask the hospital to confirm in writing that the baby has gone into
hospital and then to confirm the date of discharge.

If you postpone your maternity leave and go back to work, you must write to
tell the DSP, who will suspend your Maternity Benefit. When the baby is
discharged, your GP or hospital doctor must write to tell the DSP. You should
then start getting Maternity Benefit again. All documents you send to the DSP
must show your [ Personal Public Service number ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) (PPS number).

###  **What happens if I get sick while on postponed maternity leave?**

If go back to work after postponing your maternity leave and then need time
off because you become ill, then either:

  * Your employer may consider you to have gone back on maternity leave on the first day you are off sick, or 
  * You can choose to give up your right to take the rest of your maternity leave, so that you are treated as being on [ sick leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/) . 

##  How to apply for maternity leave

**Maternity leave** : You should apply to your employer in writing at least 4
weeks before you want to start maternity leave.

**Maternity Benefit** : You should apply for Maternity Benefit to the
Maternity Benefit Section of the DSP at least 6 weeks before you intend to go
on maternity leave.

###  **How much notice must I give my employer?**

You must give your employer at least 4 weeks' written notice that you plan to
take maternity leave and must provide a medical certificate confirming your
pregnancy.

You must also give at least 4 weeks’ written notice if you want to take the 16
weeks’ additional maternity leave. You can give both these notices at the same
time.

###  Early birth

If your baby is born more than 4 weeks before your due date, you must tell
your employer in writing within 14 days after the birth. No other notice is
needed.

###  Medical certificate

If your doctor states on a medical certificate that you must start maternity
leave for medical reasons at an earlier date than planned, your maternity
leave will start on that date. No other notice is needed.

##  Maternity leave and your employment rights

###  **Public holidays and annual leave**

In general, you are treated as being in employment while you are on maternity
leave or additional maternity leave. This means you can continue to build up
your entitlement to [ annual leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-leave/) . You are also entitled to leave
for any public holidays that occur during your maternity leave (including
additional maternity leave).

###  **Dismissal**

Maternity legislation protects you from [ unfair dismissal
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) . If
you have a dispute with your employer over maternity rights, you can make a
complaint to the Workplace Relations Commission. See ‘Having problems taking
maternity leave' below.

##  Other leave for parents

Various types of statutory leave are [ available for parents
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/leave-
for-parents/) . You may be entitled to:

  * [ Parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/) : Gives parents the right to take 26 weeks’ unpaid leave from work to look after their children aged under 12 
  * [ Paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/) : New parents (usually the father or the partner of the mother, or in the case of adoption, the parent who is not taking adoptive leave) can take 2 weeks’ leave in the first 6 months after the baby is born or adopted 
  * [ Parent’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/) : Gives parents the right to take 9 weeks’ leave during the first 2 years of a child’s life, or in the case of adoption, within 2 years of the placement of the child with the family 
  * [ Adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/) : For one parent of the adoptive couple, or a parent adopting alone 
  * [ Force majeure leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-work/) : For people who need to take time off work urgently because of an injury or illness of a close family member 
  * [ Carer’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/) : For people who need to take time off work to provide full-time care for someone who needs it, for a while 
  * [ Leave for medical care ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/) : Gives carers and parents 5 days unpaid leave to provide care or support for a serious medical reason 

##  Returning to work after maternity leave

###  Notice of return

You must give your employer at least 4 weeks’ written notice that you intend
to return to work.

If you do not comply with these notice requirements, you may lose your rights.

###  **Can I return to my old job after maternity leave?**

You are treated as being in employment while you are on maternity leave and
additional maternity leave. This means that you have the right to return to
work to the same job with the same contract of employment. If this is too
difficult to arrange, your employer must provide suitable alternative work on
terms that are not ‘less favourable’ than in your previous job.

If pay or other conditions have improved while you have been on maternity
leave, then you should get the improvements when you return to work.

If you decide not to return to work after your period of maternity leave, you
must give your employer notice in the usual way, as set out in your contract.
You can read more in our document on [ giving notice
](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/changing-job/giving-notice/) .

###  **Breastfeeding** in work

You may be able to take some time off, or work fewer hours, without loss of
pay if you are [ breastfeeding ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-
baby-is-born/breastfeeding/) . This applies for up to 2 years (104 weeks)
after the birth.

##  Having problems taking maternity leave

If you have a problem taking your maternity leave, you should raise it with
your employer first. If you cannot resolve the issue directly with your
employer, you can make a formal complaint to the [ Workplace Relations
Commission (WRC) ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-
details/) .

**How to make a complaint to the WRC**

If you have a dispute about maternity leave or have been dismissed in
connection with pregnancy or maternity leave, you can make a formal complaint
to the WRC. You should use the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

You should make your complaint within 6 months of the dispute taking place.
The time limit may be extended for up to a further 6 months, if there was
reasonable cause for the delay.

Read more about [ how to make a complaint ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/adjudication-employment-rights-disputes-and-complaints/) , including
details of the WRC adjudication process.

##  More information

If you need more information about your rights and maternity leave, contact
the Workplace Relations Commission’s [ Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) . You can
read more information in the booklet, [ Your Maternity Leave Rights Explained
(pdf)
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Publications_Forms/Guide_to_Maternity_Protection_Acts.pdf)
.

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

###  Maternity Benefit Section

Department of Social Protection

McCarter's Road  
Ardaravan  
Buncrana  
Donegal  
Ireland  
F93 CH79

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 or 0818 690 690

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-maternity-benefit/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-maternity-benefit/)

**Email:** [ maternityben@welfare.ie ](mailto:maternityben@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Maternity%20leave&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Maternity%20leave&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Other types of leave from work_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-work/)

The law gives an employee a limited right to leave from work in times of
family crisis (force majeure). Find out about compassionate leave, jury
service and career breaks.

1094.613

  * [ _Maternity care and the public health nurse_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-nurse/)

A description of the postnatal care provided by your public health nurse.

1019.80865

  * [ _Case study: Taxation of Maternity Benefit_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-taxation-of-maternity-benefit/)

A case study showing how Maternity Benefit is taxed.

1010.76764

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

