**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [
Health and safety in your environment ](/en/environment/buildings-and-
structures/) > Radon gas in buildings

#  Radon gas in buildings

  * What is radon? 
  * How to check the radon level in my home 
  * How to fix high radon levels in my home 
  * Radon testing in your workplace and school 
  * Further information 
  * Contact Details 

##  What is radon?

Radon is a naturally occurring radioactive gas that results from the decay of
uranium in rocks and soils. The gas is colourless, odourless and tasteless and
can only be measured using special equipment.

In the open air, radon is harmless. But in an enclosed space such as a house,
it may build up to an unacceptably high level. Radon from the ground enters
buildings mainly through cracks in floors or gaps around pipes or cables.

The [ Office of Radiological Protection is part of the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) ](http://www.epa.ie/radiation/) . It is responsible
for regulating, monitoring and advising on radiation matters. It assesses
radon levels and identifies areas likely to be radon hotspots.

###  How is radon harmful?

Radon decays to form tiny radioactive particles, some of which stay suspended
in the air. When you inhale these particles, they give a radiation dose that
may damage your lungs.

Radon has been shown to be a cause of lung cancer. Remaining exposed to high
levels of radon in an enclosed area can increase your risk of lung cancer,
particularly if you smoke. You can [ find out more about the effect of radon
on your health ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/radon/health-risks/) .

##  How to check the radon level in my home

Homes in some parts of the country are more likely to have a radon problem
than others. Use the [ EPA’s interactive radon map
](https://gis.epa.ie/EPAMaps/Radon?&lid=EPA:RadonRiskMapofIreland) to check if
you live in a high radon area. This is different to having your home tested
for radon. Even if you are living in a low radon area on the map, your home
may have high levels of radon when tested.

Every home has different amounts of radon so the EPA recommends that everyone
has their home tested for radon. The EPA has a list of [ registered radon
testing services ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/radon/radon-
testing/) .

Testing involves placing two small detection devices in the house for three
months. This period allows for variations in radon levels due to changes in
weather, ventilation, and so on. At the end of three months, you post the
detectors back to the testing laboratory. The lab calculates the radon level
in becquerels per cubic metre, expressed as Bq/m3. [ Read more about testing
your home for radon ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/radon/radon-
testing/) .

##  How to fix high radon levels in my home

If the radon level in your home is over the national reference level of 200
Bq/m3, the EPA recommends taking action to [ reduce the level of radon in your
home ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/radon/fixing-a-radon-problem/) .
This is called ‘radon remediation’.

The two main methods of radon remediation are to:

  * Prevent radon entering your home from the ground underneath 
  * Remove the radon after it has entered your home 

In either case, you should have your home re-tested after the work has been
completed to ensure the radon level has dropped below 200 Bq/m3.

Radon remediation works may qualify for the [ Home Renovation Incentive scheme
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-
improvements/home-renovation-incentive/) .

##  Radon testing in your workplace and school

If your workplace is located in a high radon area on the [ EPA’s interactive
radon workplace map
](https://gis.epa.ie/EPAMaps/Radon?lid=EPA:RadonMapforWorkplaces) , your
employer must test the workplace for radon. You can [ read more about radon
testing in the workplace ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-
you/radon/employers/) on the EPA’s website.

The Department of Education arranges radon tests for schools. You can read
more about radon testing in schools and find out how to check the radon levels
of your school [ on the EPA's website ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-
you/radon/schools/) .

##  Further information

  * For information about radon and how you can reduce your exposure to radon levels in your home, [ see the EPA’s webpage on Radon for Householders ](https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/radon/householders/)
  * Read more about radon in the [ World Health Organisation’s factsheet ](http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs291/en/) [ ](https://www.epa.ie/our-services/monitoring--assessment/radiation/national-radon-control-strategy/) [ ](https://www.epa.ie/our-services/monitoring--assessment/radiation/national-radon-control-strategy/)
  * Find out about [ the National Radon Control Strategy ](https://www.epa.ie/our-services/monitoring--assessment/radiation/national-radon-control-strategy/)   

##  Contact Details

###  Office of Radiological Protection

Environmental Protection Agency

3 Clonskeagh Square  
Clonskeagh Road  
Dublin 14  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0) 1 268 0100

**Fax:** +353 (0) 1 268 0199

**Homepage:** [ http://www.epa.ie/ ](http://www.epa.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@epa.ie ](mailto:info@epa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 May 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/radon-in-buildings/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Radon%20gas%20in%20buildings&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/radon-in-buildings/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/radon-in-buildings/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Radon%20gas%20in%20buildings&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/buildings-
and-structures/radon-in-buildings/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Access to environmental information_ ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/access-to-environmental-information/)

You have the right to access certain information about the environment and
pollutants that may affect it. Find out how to access environmental
information.

1227.851

  * [ _How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-in-ireland/)

Outlines the services and online tools available to get recognition for your
foreign qualification in Ireland. Also explains how the National Framework of
Qualifications can help you compare and contrast different qualifications.

934.9784

  * [ _Dangerous buildings and structures_ ](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/dangerous-structures/)

Each local authority has responsibility for dealing with dangerous places and
structures in its area.

905.6911

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

