**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Losing your job ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/losing-your-job/)
> Losing your job

#  Losing your job

  * Introduction 
  * Types of job loss 
  * What to do once you've lost your job 
  * Looking for work 
  * Returning to work 

##  Introduction

Losing your job can be traumatic and stressful. This document outlines some of
the steps you can take when you lose your job as well as some of the supports
which are available to you.

##  Types of job loss

If you lose your job you may have been made [ redundant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/what-is-redundancy/) or you may have been [ dismissed
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment_and_redundancy/dismissal/)
.

**Redundancy** : This happens when your job in the company no longer exists,
either because the business is closing or is reducing staff. If you are made
redundant, you may qualify for a [ redundancy payment
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-payments/)
. You can find out how [ your redundancy payment is taxed
](/en/employment/retirement/income-tax-in-retirement/retirement-lump-sum-
taxation/) .

**Dismissal** : This happens when you have lost your job but your role still
exists in the company. You may or may not have been replaced. If you have been
let go, you should check that your employer had [ fair grounds for your
dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/fair-grounds-
for-dismissal/) . If you are concerned about your dismissal you should find
out more about your rights under [ unfair dismissals legislation.
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/)

When you lose your job you are entitled to [ notice
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-job-
entitlements/) and you may also be entitled to payment in lieu of wages and
for holidays.

##  What to do once you've lost your job

If you have been made unemployed, there are a number of steps you must take
and a number of supports which may be available to you.

###  PRSI and tax

When you lose your job you should register as unemployed with your [ local
Intreo centre or Social Welfare Branch Office
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/List-of-Social-Welfare-Local-and-Branch-
Offices-by-County.aspx) even if you do not qualify for an unemployment
payment. You may be able to sign on for [ credited PRSI contributions
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) so that you do not have a break
in your social insurance record.

You may be entitled to a [ tax refund ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-
refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/) if you have been out of work for
some time.

You will no longer receive a P45 when you lose your job. Your employer will
notify Revenue of your leaving date and details of your final pay and
deductions through Revenue’s online system. You can view these details through
[ Revenue’s myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-
web/sign_in.html?execution=e1s1) .

###  Social welfare and other supports

You may be entitled to an unemployment social welfare payment. If you have
enough social insurance contributions you may be entitled to [ Jobseeker’s
Benefit. ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)

If you do not have enough PRSI contributions you may qualify for [ Jobseeker’s
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) which
is a means-tested benefit.

Depending on your circumstances you may qualify for a [ medical card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) or [ GP visit
card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) and other
secondary benefits such as [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) under the [
Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-scheme/) .

##  Looking for work

There are different ways to help you find a job. These include:

  * Recruitment agencies 
  * Websites 
  * Newspapers 

There also are different organisations which can help you. You should register
with your local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office for information
about job vacancies. Its services also include career guidance and information
about training courses.

[ Local Employment Services (LES)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/d6f636-employment-services-offices/) assist
long-term unemployed people through training and career guidance to progress
from social welfare to work.

There are [ employment schemes ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/) for long-term unemployed people such
as [ Community Employment. ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/)

###  Education and training

After losing your job you may decide to  return to education  or [ vocational
training, ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/) perhaps changing
direction in your career.

There is a wide range of education and training programmes offering full-time
and part-time courses. The courses include [ Further Education and Training
(FET) courses ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-
courses/) and courses provided by [ Education and Training Boards (ETBs)
](http://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) .

If you are on an unemployment payment you may be eligible for the [ Vocational
Training Opportunities Scheme (VTOS) ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) or the [ Back to Education
Allowance (BTEA). ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-
allowance/)

##  Returning to work

When you are [ returning to work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/training-and-looking-for-work/return-to-work/) you should make sure that
your tax and PRSI deductions are correct. You should let your local [ Intreo
Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/List-of-Social-Welfare-
Local-and-Branch-Offices-by-County.aspx) know when you are starting work.

If you are [ taking up self-employment ](/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/) you may be eligible for the [
Back to Work Enterprise Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments-and-work/back-to-work-enterprise-allowance/) .

_**Page edited:** 12 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-your-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Losing%20your%20job&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-your-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-your-
job/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Losing%20your%20job&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-your-job/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Losing your job - entitlements_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-job-entitlements/)

Describes the rights of employees if being let go from their employment.
Action to be taken in case of dispute with the employer.

2044.7488

  * [ _Leaving your job_ ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/changing-job/giving-notice/)

Employees are required by law to give notice when changing jobs. Find out
about giving notice and getting a reference.

1450.7549

  * [ _If your landlord wants you to leave_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/if-your-landlord-wants-you-to-leave/)

The rules that private landlords and approved housing bodies must comply with
when ending a residential tenancy.

1262.4988

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

