**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Further education and training ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/) > Apprenticeships

#  Apprenticeships

  * What is an apprenticeship? 
  * Types of apprenticeships 
  * Funding supports for apprenticeships 
  * Apprenticeship fees 
  * Apprenticeship wages and allowances 
  * How to qualify for an apprenticeship 
  * How to apply for an apprenticeship 
  * For more information 

##  What is an apprenticeship?

An apprenticeship is how people are trained in a craft trade or profession.
You can get training in a traditional craft apprenticeship such as plumbing or
carpentry or a new apprenticeship such as accounting technician – see ‘Types
of apprenticeships’ below.

An apprenticeship programme provides on-the-job training with an employer
along with off-the-job training in an education centre. An apprenticeship can
last 2 to 4 years, during which time you will spend some time in off-the-job
training.

When you complete an apprenticeship programme, you will get a recognised
qualification at Level 5 or above on the NFQ framework.

You can start an apprenticeship from age 16 to 18 years depending on the
apprenticeship programme. There is no upper age limit.

You can get advice on apprenticeships: Freephone 1800 794 487 from 12 noon to
6pm, Monday to Friday.

**Budget 2024**

It was announced in [ Budget 2024
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/budgets/budget-2024/) ,
there will be a once-off reduction of 33% in the contribution fee for
apprentices in higher education in the 2023/2024 academic year.

##  Types of apprenticeships

There are 2 key types of apprenticeships. The main craft trades and
professions are set by SOLAS, employers and unions.

###  **Craft apprenticeships**

A craft apprenticeship will generally last for 4 years, during which time you
will spend 3 different periods in off-the-job training.

Generally, you will start the first off-the-job training phase in an [
Education and Training Board (ETB) ](http://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-
etbs/) . Later, your off-the-job training will be in a Technological
University or [ Institute of Technology ](http://www.thea.ie/about-thea/) .

The skills you develop will be assessed through on-the-job competence testing
as well as off-the-job modular assessment and examinations. If you complete
these assessments successfully, you will be awarded an Advanced Certificate –
craft (level 6 on the [ National Framework of Qualifications
](http://www.qqi.ie/Articles/Pages/National-Framework-of-
Qualifications-\(NFQ\).aspx) ).

Craft apprenticeships include carpentry, plumbing, motor mechanics and
electrical apprenticeships.

###  **New apprenticeships in other industries**

New apprenticeships introduced since 2016 lead to an award between Levels 5-10
on the National Framework of Qualifications. Each apprenticeship programme is
between 2 and 4 years.

There are a number of models of on-the-job and off-the-job training, as well
as different models of delivery and different target groups (including people
already in employment).

Industry-led groups (consortia), work with education and training providers
and other partners, to oversee the development and roll-out of new
apprenticeships.

New apprenticeships in ICT, finance, hospitality, [ farming
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/a1762-minister-harris-announces-new-
farming-apprenticeships-are-open-for-applications/) and the [ public service
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/194f4-ministers-harris-and-donohoe-
launch-public-service-apprenticeship-plan/) offer apprenticeship jobs in
software development, accounting technician, commis chef, farm management and
digital marketing.

You can search for apprenticeships on [ apprenticeship.ie
](https://apprenticeship.ie/career-seekers/jobs) .

##  Funding supports for apprenticeships

There are a number of supports for apprentices and employers. You can check
for supports on the [ apprenticeship.ie ](https://apprenticeship.ie/) website
and with your local ETB.

**Apprentice supports**

There are financial supports to help young people from under-represented
groups, those leaving care and the Traveling community to access
apprenticeships.

  * The [ Access and Inclusion bursary ](https://apprenticeship.ie/news-events/news/access-and-inclusion-bursary) supports young people from under-represented groups into national apprenticeships. 
  * The [ Traveller Apprenticeship Incentivisation Programme (TAIP) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/01abc-minister-harris-announces-roll-out-of-450000-in-funding-for-travellers-in-apprenticeships/) offers a limited number of bursaries to members of the Traveller community. 
  * The [ Apprenticeship Bursary for Care Leavers ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/e2a6a-minister-harris-announces-funding-of-115-million-to-support-care-leavers-and-members-of-the-traveller-and-roma-communities/) will be available to support [ care leavers ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-in-care/#l53210) to take up an apprenticeship in 2024. 

The bursaries can provide up to €3,000. You can request an application form
and information from [ apprenticeship@nao.ie ](mailto:apprenticeship@nao.ie)

**Employer supports**

Certain employers who provide apprenticeships can get an [ apprenticeship
employers grant ](https://apprenticeship.ie/news-events/news/apprenticeship-
employer-grant-2022) of €2,000 per year for each registered apprentice.

Employers can get a [ gender-based bursary ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/2689f-minister-harris-announces-new-gender-based-funding-for-
apprenticeship-employers/) .

Small and micro business employers can get financial and training supports
through [ One More Job ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/e56f4-minister-
harris-launches-financial-and-training-supports-for-employers-taking-on-
apprentices/) if they employ one or more apprentices in 2023.

##  Apprenticeship fees

Generally, an apprentice does not pay fees. However, apprentices pay a pro-
rata registration fee (student contribution) if their off-the-job training
takes place within a college such as an Institute of Technology or
Technological University. The registration fee is generally based on the
amount of time the apprentice spends in the college. You can find information
about the pro-rata registration fee on apprenticeship.ie.

Apprentices are not eligible for the [ student grant ](/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-
scheme/) .

##  Apprenticeship wages and allowances

Rates of apprenticeship wages and allowances can vary depending on the type of
apprenticeship and the industry you have chosen:

  * **Apprenticeships developed before 2016** : While you are training on the job, your employer will pay you a recommended apprenticeship wage. The ETB pay a weekly allowance equivalent to that wage while you are training off the job. In some cases, the ETB will contribute to your travel and accommodation costs. You can get information about [ off-the-job training payments and allowances for craft apprentices ](https://apprenticeship.ie/news-events/news/off-the-job-training-payments-allowances-for-craft-apprentices) . 
  * **Apprenticeships developed from 2016** : Your employer will pay you for the duration of the apprenticeship. The rate of pay is agreed between you and your employer. 

**Annual leave:** Your [ statutory holiday entitlements
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-
leave/) continue to accrue during the off-the-job phases, but must be taken
during the on-the-job phases at times agreed with your employer.

**Apprentices who have children:** [ Working Family Payment (WFP)
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/) is a
weekly tax-free payment for employees with children. If you are an apprentice
and you have at least one child you may qualify for WFP, if you meet the
conditions for WFP.

###  Other allowances

You should check with your employer or local ETB if you are entitled to any
allowances such as a [ tool allowance
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/278036/f15d8239-106e-45b4-bb7a-2f62780f2f3a.pdf#page=null)
. You should also check if you qualify for [ employment tax credits and
reliefs ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/employment-tax-
credits-and-reliefs/) .

##  How to qualify for an apprenticeship

To be eligible for an apprenticeship, you must be at least 16 years of age and
have a minimum of grade D in 5 subjects in the Junior Cycle or equivalent
exam. However, higher educational qualifications and other requirements may be
required by employers.

If you don't have these qualifications, you may still register as an
apprentice with an employer if you:

  * Complete an approved preparatory training course followed by an assessment interview. 
  * Are over 18 years of age and have at least 3 years of relevant work experience, in which case you will also be asked to do an assessment interview. 

You will be asked to pass a colour-vision test for some apprenticeships.

You can find the qualifications needed in the programme information for each [
apprenticeship programme ](https://apprenticeship.ie/pages/discover) .

##  How to apply for an apprenticeship

###  **Preparation programmes**

**Access to Apprenticeship Programme**

You can apply for an Access to Apprenticeship Programme. The programme
supports people aged 16 to 24 years from under-represented groups into
national apprenticeships. The 12-week programme is currently provided by [ TU
Dublin ](https://www.tudublin.ie/study/apprenticeships/access-to-
apprenticeship/) and [ TU Shannon ](https://lit.ie/en-ie/study-at-lit/course-
information/apprenticeships/access-to-apprenticeship) .

**Pre-Apprenticeship course**

If you don’t have the minimum entry requirements, you can take a pre-
Apprenticeship course. For information, you can contact [ SOLAS
](https://www.solas.ie/) or your local [ Youthreach
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/youthreach/) .

You can also prepare for an apprenticeship by doing a [ Post Leaving
Certificate (PLC)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) course in a related topic such as
construction. Contact your local [ Education and Training Board
](https://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) .

###  Apply directly to an employer

You can [ find apprenticeship jobs ](https://apprenticeship.ie/career-
seekers/jobs) for craft and new apprenticeships on [ apprenticeship.ie
](https://www.apprenticeship.ie/) . Apply directly to the employer before the
closing date.

You can also approach an employer to ask if they will consider taking you as
an apprentice.

All employers must be approved by SOLAS before they can hire an apprentice.
Employers can find information about [ how to become an apprentice employer
](https://apprenticeship.ie/career-seekers/jobs) .

Employers and apprentices must sign a formal contract agreeing they will meet
certain conditions and that the employer will pay you for the length of the
apprenticeship.

**Craft apprenticeship**

If you are interested in a craft apprenticeship, you can also contact the
Apprenticeship Section of your [ local ETB
](https://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs) for details about applying.

**Apprenticeships in other areas of industry**

Apply to the industry lead or co-ordinating provider for the apprenticeship
you are interested in. You can also contact the Apprenticeship Section of your
[ local ETB ](https://apprenticeship.ie/more/apprenticeship-directory) for
information.

##  For more information

For advice on getting an apprenticeship, call Freephone 1800 794 487 from 12
noon to 6pm, Monday to Friday.

_**Page edited:** 30 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/apprenticeships/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Apprenticeships&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/apprenticeships/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/apprenticeships/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Apprenticeships&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/apprenticeships/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Payment for people who retire at 65_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/payment-for-people-retired-at-65/)

If you retire at 65, you may qualify for a benefit payment until you reach 66.
The payment is similar to Jobseeker’s Benefit, but you don’t need to be
looking for work or sign on at your local Intreo centre.

518.778

  * [ _Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

512.3617

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

506.8844

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

