**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to post-primary school ](/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/) > Transition Year

#  Transition Year

  * What is Transition Year (TY)? 
  * Transition Year programme 
  * TY assessment and certification 

##  What is Transition Year (TY)?

Transition Year (also called TY) is a one-year programme between Junior Cycle
and Senior Cycle. It is designed to act as a bridge between the two by helping
the transition or change from the more  dependent  learning of the Junior
Cycle to the more  independent  self-directed learning required for the Senior
Cycle

All second-level schools have the option of offering the Transition Year
programme to their students and most of them do offer it.

The Transition Year programme follows the [ Junior Cycle
](/en/education/state-examinations/junior-cycle-exam-and-results/) and is
generally seen as the first year of a 3-year [ Senior Cycle
](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-
school/senior-cycle/) programme. However, Transition Year is not the first
year of the [ Leaving Certificate programme ](/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-certificate/) , which is a 2-year cycle.

###  Aims of the Transition Year programme

The Transition Year offers students an opportunity to:

  * Engage in independent, self-directed learning 
  * Develop general, technical and academic skills 
  * Develop work-related skills 
  * Develop social skills such as communitions and building self-confidence 
  * Mature and develop without the pressure of an examination. 

The Professional Development Service for Teachers (PDST) has detailed
information about the [ Transition Year programme
](https://www.pdst.ie/node/347) .

##  Transition Year programme

Each school designs its own TY programme, to suit the needs and interests of
its students. Schools must design the TY programme within set [ guidelines for
schools ](https://ncca.ie/en/updates-and-events/latest-news/2022/may/ty-
guidelines-for-schools-are-being-updated/) .

Areas of study may include:

  * Environmental studies 
  * Chinese culture and language studies 
  * Global development issues 
  * Debating development 
  * Tourism studies 
  * Student safety in the workplace 
  * Soap operas and popular culture 
  * Food matters 
  * Legal studies 
  * Sports coaching 
  * Introduction to genetics and biotechnology 
  * Media and communications 
  * Japanese studies 

Students can sample a wide range of subject areas and can make more informed
choices about the kind of Leaving Certificate programme they want to take
after the Transition Year. Work experience is a core aspect of the Transition
Year programme. It aims to bring new kinds of learning opportunities to
students by experiencing adult and working life.

You can find more information about the [ TY curriculum
](https://www.pdst.ie/TY/curriculum) on the websites of the [ PDST
](http://www.pdst.ie/TY/curriculum) and the [ National Council for Curriculum
and Assessment ](https://www.ncca.ie/en/senior-cycle/programmes-and-key-
skills/transition-year) .

Transition Year is optional and admission criteria vary from school to school.

###  Parental involvement in the Transition Year

When drawing up the Transition Year programme, schools are encouraged to
involve parents in the decision-making process and planning for TY.

Most schools arrange sessions for parents of third-year students to discuss
the Transition Year programme. Aschools can run a 'Student Introduction to
Transition Year' seminar for Junior Cycle students.

Some parents make their expertise available to the school during the
Transition Year as visiting speakers. Other parents may assist in the Work
Experience Programme. All parents are invited to contribute to the evaluation
of the programme. You can find further information in [ this list of
frequently asked questions on the Transition Year Programme.
](http://www.pdst.ie/node/347)

##  TY assessment and certification

There is no end-of-year state examination in the Transition Year. This is to
ensure that the focus of the year is learning-led rather than exam-driven.

The activity-based learning ethos of the year requires each school to engage
in school-based assessment, which helps students to identify their own
strengths and weaknesses, as well as develop the skills of self-assessment and
reflection.

Assessment is ongoing, with portfolio assessment, project work, and
exhibitions of students' work. Oral aural, practical and written activities
all form part of this assessment process.

Evaluation of work experience or community service activities can involve the
providers or hosts of the activities.

Students who have successfully completed the Transition Year Progamme are
usually awarded a certificate of participation by their school.  

_**Page edited:** 15 November 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/transition-
year/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Transition%20Year&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/transition-
year/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/transition-
year/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Transition%20Year&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/transition-
year/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Benefit and contribution years for social welfare purposes_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/benefit-and-contribution-years-for-social-welfare/)

To qualify for most social insurance payments, you must first have a certain
number of PRSI contributions paid since you started work. Find out which years
count as benefit and contribution years for social welfare purposes.

1247.5104

  * [ _Transition from One-Parent Family Payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/moving-from-ofp/)

The age limit for One-Parent Family Payment (OFP) reduced to 7 years in July
2015. People who no longer qualify for OFP because their youngest child is
over the age limit may be eligible for other income supports. This document
outlines your options.

1119.639

  * [ _Witnesses under 18 years old_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/witnesses-under-18-years-old/)

Rules about how witnesses under 18 years of age can give evidence in the
District Court, the Circuit Court or the Central Criminal Court.

1106.2316

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

