**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Further education and training ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/) > Further education and training (FET) courses

#  Further education and training (FET) courses

  * What is further education and training (FET)? 
  * Finding the right FET course 
  * Further education and training qualifications 
  * Education and training supports if you are unemployed 
  * Other education and training supports 
  * Financial supports 

##  What is further education and training (FET)?

Further education and training (FET) covers any education and training after
second-level education ( [ post-primary school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/) ) and up to [ third-level education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) (higher level
education).

FET is for adults and young people aged over 16.

You can still participate in a FET course, if you left school and didn’t
complete your second-level education.

FET can help you get new skills if you are:

  * [ Leaving school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-training/leaving-school/)
  * Unemployed 
  * Looking for your first job 
  * Changing direction in your career 

You can choose from many FET courses and programmes.

FET includes:

  * [ Apprenticeships ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-training/apprenticeships/)
  * [ Traineeships ](https://www.etbi.ie/traineeship/)
  * [ Post Leaving Cert (PLC) courses ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/)
  * [ Community education ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/returning-to-education/adult-education/)
  * [ Adult literacy and numeracy skills ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/returning-to-education/adult-literacy/)

##  Finding the right FET course

There is a wide range of further education and training (FET) courses
available.

You can choose from:

  * [ Full-time courses ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) , or 
  * [ Part-time courses ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/parttime) . 

[ Qualifax ](http://www.qualifax.ie/) has a database of all further education
courses. It also has the information you need to make an informed choice about
your education, training and career path. How to qualify and what training
allowances are available vary from course to course, so check the details of
each course carefully.

You can also get more information on FET courses, how to access them and the [
financial supports ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/58c68-get-financial-
support-for-training-or-education/) available on [ The Right Course
](http://www.gov.ie/therightcourse) portal on Gov.ie.

###  **Help to find the right course**

If you need help finding a FET course, you can contact the [ Adult Educational
Guidance and Information Service
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/0da49-career-guidance-and-information/) .

This service is available to:

  * Everyone over 18 
  * People over 16 who are not in full-time education. 

The service prioritises people who are unemployed.

Read more about [ returning to education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/returning-to-
education/sources-of-information-on-returning-to-education/) .

##  Further education and training qualifications

The [ National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ) ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-
do/the-qualifications-system/national-framework-of-qualifications) allows the
different levels of qualifications to be compared. There are 10 Levels on the
NFQ. FET courses are provided at Levels 1 to 6 on the NFQ.

###  **Progression to third-level education**

If you have a qualification at NFQ Level 5 and Level 6, you can progress to
third-level education with the [ Higher Education Links Scheme
](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/qqi-awards/going-to-higher-education-using-my-
qqi-award-learner) .

The [ tertiary education programme ](/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/tertiary-education-programme/) is a new pathway
to third level education. You start in a further education institution and
progress to a higher education institution to complete a degree.

You can also [ access third-level education as a mature student
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-students/) .

##  Education and training supports if you are unemployed

If you are unemployed, you can access further education and training through a
number of programmes:

###  **Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme (VTOS)**

If you are an unemployed or getting certain social welfare payments, the [
Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme (VTOS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) can help you to return to
full-time education.

VTOS courses are particularly suitable if you have been unemployed or out of
school for some time.

###  **Back to Education Training Programme**

The [ Back to Education Training Programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-programme/) can help you to return to part-time or full-time
education and keep your social welfare payment or get a [ Back to Education
Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/) .

###  **Work Placement Experience Programme (WPEP)**

The [ Work Placement Experience Programme (WPEP)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/work-placement-experience-programme/)
can provide you with work experience if you have never had a job, or if you
have lost your job.

You must be getting a qualifying social welfare payment for a minimum time. If
you qualify, you will get a weekly WPEP allowance.

###  **Training Support Grant (TSG)**

The [ Training Support Grant (TSG)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/employment-supports/#f266ba) is available to people on certain [
qualifying payments or schemes
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/0a962-operational-guidelines-training-
support-grant/#qualifying-eligibility) , including the Work Placement
Experience Programme.

It funds quick access to short-term training, including courses up to and
including QQI level 6.

You may get a TSG if your Employment Personal Adviser finds you can’t start a
job without:

  * Getting an immediate skill 
  * Getting or renewing a certification or permit. 

You must apply for a TSG through your Employment Personal Adviser or Job
Coach.

###  **Fastrack to IT**

[ FIT (Fastrack to IT) ](http://www.fit.ie/) provides information technology
training for people who are getting certain social welfare payments or [
signing for credits ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-
insurance-contributions/) .

Courses include office administration, web design and programming, broadband
communications and PC maintenance.

###  **The Traineeship Programme**

[ The Traineeship Programme
](https://www.solas.ie/programmes/traineeship/trainees/) provides training and
work experience. The duration of the programme depends on [ your area of
training ](https://www.solas.ie/programmes/traineeship/) . You may keep your
social welfare payment or get a FET training allowance.

To get a FET training allowance, you must be entitled to a qualifying social
welfare payment, such as [ Jobseeker's Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) or [ Jobseeker's Benefit.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)

###  **Specific Skills Training**

[ Specific Skills Training ](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime)
lets you learn new work-related skills. The [ courses on offer
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/types) vary from centre to centre and
from year to year, with different levels of certification.

The courses are run during the day and in the evenings. Priority on daytime
courses is given to unemployed people. A day course is free to all unemployed
people, even if you are not getting a social welfare payment. An evening
course is not free unless you are getting a social welfare payment.

You may be able to keep your social welfare payment or get a FET training
allowance if you are doing a day course. To get a FET training allowance, you
must be entitled to a qualifying social welfare payment, such as [ Jobseeker's
Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) or [ Jobseeker's
Benefit. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)

###  **Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI)**

[ Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI)
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) is for people who are
unemployed and finding it difficult to get a job. It is for people aged 18-35.
Courses are full-time and lead to major awards on the NFQ at levels 3, 4 and
5.

##  Other education and training supports

###  **For younger people**

####  **Youthreach**

If you are aged between 15 and 20 and have left school without any formal
qualifications, the [ Youthreach programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/youthreach/) will provide you with opportunities for:

  * Basic education 
  * Personal development 
  * Vocational training 
  * Work experience. 

####  **Community Training Centres (CTCs)**

[ Community Training Centres (CTCs)
](https://www.fetchcourses.ie/courses/fulltime) are independent community-
based organisations, which provide training and education for early school
leavers, primarily aged between 16 and 21.

Courses are generally for one year, full-time, and lead to major awards on the
NFQ at levels 3 and 4.

###  **Online learning**

[ eCollege ](https://www.ecollege.ie/) is the national online learning service
for further education and training.

[ Learn with NALA ](https://www.learnwithnala.ie/) can help you improve your
reading, writing, maths, and digital skills up to Level 3.

###  **Accessing higher education**

####  **Tertiary education programme**

The [ tertiary education programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-
information/fd38f-tertiary-programmes/) lets you start in a further education
setting and progress to a higher education institution to complete a degree.

####  **Springboard+**

[ Springboard+ ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/springboard/) provides free higher education
places for unemployed people. You can keep your social welfare payment for as
long are you are entitled to it while you are participating on a Springboard+
course. If you are working, only level 6 courses are free.

###  **If you are working**

####  **Skills for Work**

[ Skills for Work ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/cb762-skills-for-work-
training-courses/) can help you to improve the basic skills you need in the
workplace such as literacy, numeracy, and IT skills.

The courses are 35 hours long and free of charge. It is delivered by the
Educational and Training Boards for people in part-time or full-time
employment.

####  **Skillnet Ireland**

[ Skillnet Ireland ](https://www.skillnetireland.ie/) supports groups of
private sector companies to set up training networks to deliver a range of
accredited or industry-recognised programmes.

Skillnet Ireland offers some training to [ unemployed people
](https://www.skillnetireland.ie/about/developing-your-skills/developing-
irelands-future-workforce/) . If you are unemployed, you will not pay for this
training.

##  Financial supports

Depending on your situation, you may be able to access financial supports,
such as:

  * The [ Back to Education Programme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-programme/)
  * The [ Back to Education Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/)
  * [ Training allowances ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-allowances/) . 

You can find out more about financial supports available to you from your
local [ Citizens Information Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/)
.

_**Page edited:** 11 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-courses/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Further%20education%20and%20training%20%28FET%29%20courses&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-courses/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-courses/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Further%20education%20and%20training%20%28FET%29%20courses&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-courses/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Further Education and Training (FET) allowances_ ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-allowances/)

If you get a place on a Further Education and Training (FET) training course
you may be paid an allowance.

2317.4583

  * [ _Education, Training and Development Option_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/education-training-and-development-option/)

You can take part in certain short education, training or development courses
and keep your jobseeker's payment. Find out more.

1529.6846

  * [ _Further and higher education qualifications_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/colleges-and-qualifications/fet-qualifications/)

The system of validation of qualifications in further and higher education.

1335.6581

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

