**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Special education needs ](/en/education/special-education-needs/) > Summer
education programme

#  Summer education programme

  * What is the Summer Programme? 
  * Who qualifies for the Summer Programme? 
  * School-based programme 
  * Home-based programme 
  * DEIS schools summer camp 
  * Can I get school transport during the Summer Programme? 
  * More information 

##  What is the Summer Programme?

The Summer Programme gives educational support during the summer to:

  * Children with complex special educational needs, and 
  * Children most at risk of educational disadvantage. 

All primary schools and post-primary schools, including DEIS schools, can
provide a Summer Programme.

The Summer Programme 2024 includes:

  * **A Special School Pilot programme** for pupils in special schools 
  * **A primary school scheme** for pupils in mainstream primary schools, which combines the previous Inclusion Programme and special classes 
  * **Summer camps in DEIS schools** focusing on numeracy and literacy 
  * **A post-primary scheme** for pupils in post-primary schools 
  * **A home-based programme** for children with complex needs (where a school-based programme is not available) 

The Summer Programme is based on the _July Provision,_ which was delivered to
children with special educational needs in previous years by the Department of
Education.

##  Who qualifies for the Summer Programme?

The following children qualify for school-based programmes for both primary
school and post-primary school:

  * Children in a special school or a special class 
  * Children in mainstream classes in schools who are accessing the highest level of the [ continuum of support (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/40642/674c98d5e72d48b7975f60895b4e8c9a.pdf#page=null)

Children accessing the highest level of the continuum of support includes
children with:

  * Autism 
  * Down syndrome 
  * Sensory impairments, such as deafness or severe hearing loss, or blindness or severe visual impairment 
  * Severe or significant emotional behavioural needs, to the extent that this impact their ability to learn or function independently 
  * Significant needs in cognitive functioning, independence and daily living skills (including moderate to severe, or significant or profound, learning disabilities) 
  * Significant needs in social communication and social interaction, combined with rigid repetitive patterns of behaviour 
  * Certain other disabilities 

####  **Starting primary school in 2024**

If your child meets the above criteria and is entering primary school in
September 2024, they also qualify for the primary school Summer Programme.

###  **Priority places**

Schools will give priority to students in special classes when giving places
on the school-based programme. Schools will then give places to students with
complex special needs in mainstream classes.

###  **Remaining places**

When the priority places have gone, the remaining places will be offered to
children considered most at risk of educational disadvantage.

For example, the remaining places may be offered to:

  * Children identified by the school as being most at risk of educational disadvantage and early school-leaving 
  * Children accessing Special Education Teacher (SET) or Special Needs Assistant (SNA) support 
  * Children from Traveller and Roma communities 
  * Children who have recently arrived from Ukraine and other countries who need support with English language or integration 

You can find more information about who qualifies for a school-based Summer
Programme under the [ Primary School Scheme (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/288325/6a30b75a-2165-448e-a7fa-c25c5df44612.pdf#page=null)
and [ Post-Primary School Scheme (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/288326/a163e4ae-98a5-47c9-8d12-83e055b60b68.pdf#page=null)
.

##  School-based programme

All primary schools and post-primary schools can provide a [ Summer Programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5d15a-summer-programme/) for mainstream
pupils with complex needs and those at greatest risk of educational
disadvantage.

The programme will take place for a set number of weeks in the child’s school
during the school summer holidays.

You should contact your child’s school to find out about its Summer Programme.

###  **Special school**

All special schools can provide a Summer Programme. The programme will take
place for a set number of weeks in the child’s school during the school summer
holidays.

For special schools, a Summer Programme National Coordinator works with the
school to facilitate the programme.

If your child’s school can’t offer your child a place, or it is not providing
a school-based Summer Programme, you can [ contact the Coordinator
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ea8fe-summer-prog-special-schools-
temps/#queries-and-support) (see ‘More information’ below). They can help you
find a place for your child in their own school, or at another location.

If your child cannot get a place on a school-based Summer Programme, they may
access the home-based programme (see ‘Home-based programme’ below).

You can find more [ information on the special school Summer Programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ea8fe-summer-prog-special-schools-temps/)
, including [ information for parents
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ea8fe-summer-prog-special-schools-
temps/#information-for-parents) .

##  Home-based programme

The [ home-based Summer Programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a0e87-summer-provision-home-based-
programme/#online-sanctioning-portal) is only available to children with
complex special educational needs who are in a special school or special
class.

You can apply for the home-based programme if:

  * Your child’s school is not running a Summer Programme, 
  * Or it is unable to offer your child a place. 

If your child qualifies for the home-based Summer Programme, they will get 10
hours support per week for 4 weeks.

###  Applying for the home-based Summer Programme

You can [ apply for the home-based Summer Programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a0e87-summer-provision-home-based-
programme/#online-sanctioning-portal) through your child’s school. **The
closing date for registration was 14 June 2024.**

You should not start a home-based programme until the Department of Education
has confirmed that your child qualifies for the home-based Summer Programme.

In 2024, a teacher can tutor a group of up to 3 children in the home-based
summer programme.

If approved by the Department of Education, a private group provider may
provide for 4 or more children.

You can read about the [ home-based Summer Programme in 2024 (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/294943/b1429b72-d1cf-4674-8eb4-4f5e3c533622.pdf#page=null)
.

##  DEIS schools summer camp

DEIS primary schools may [ run literacy and numeracy camps
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ab25e-summer-provision-school-based-
programme-in-primary-schools/#deis-summer-camps) for children in addition to a
school-based Summer Programme.

Literacy and numeracy camps are for children who are considered by the school
to have the greatest level of need. Each camp is for 1 week and provides 4
hours of instruction each day. The summer camps also provide wellbeing and
school engagement programmes for children at risk of educational disadvantage.
The camps can be run through English or Gaeilge.

Primary schools can allocate places to children of any age, including sixth
class, and can choose children who would most benefit from the programme.

You can read information for parents about the [ school-based programme and
DEIS summer camps in 2024 (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/289250/72d3ed01-a75e-481a-98b9-35ed6ac567af.pdf#page=null)
.

##  Can I get school transport during the Summer Programme?

If you normally use the [ special education needs (SEN) transport scheme
](/en/education/special-education-needs/school-transport-for-children-with-
special-needs/) , it may be provided during the Summer Programme. If SEN
transport services are not available, you can apply for grant funding after
your child has completed the programme.

The [ School Transport Scheme ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-transport-scheme/)
will not run during the Summer Programme. If your child normally uses the
School Transport Scheme, your school may make local transport arrangements.
You should contact your school for more details.

##  More information

You should contact your child’s school to find out about its school-based
Summer Programme.

You can get [ more information about the Summer Programme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5d15a-summer-
programme/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/summerprogramme/) from the Department of
Education on Gov.ie.

You can also call the Summer Programme helpline from Monday to Friday between
9am and 5pm, on 0906 484292.

Or, you can email [ schoolsummerprogramme@education.gov.ie
](mailto:schoolsummerprogramme@education.gov.ie) .

_**Page edited:** 4 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/summer-education-programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Summer%20education%20programme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/summer-education-programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/summer-education-programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Summer%20education%20programme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/summer-education-programme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Special educational needs_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-education/)

This page describes the special arrangements for the education of children
with special educational needs.

1674.3075

  * [ _The law on special educational needs_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/the-law-on-special-educational-needs/)

This page covers the law covering special educational needs. This is complex
and is spread across the Irish Constitution and other pieces of legislation.

1643.646

  * [ _Back to Education Programme_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-programme/)

This Programme can support you to take part in educational and personal
development courses to help you to access employment.

1602.5688

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

