**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Employment rights and duties ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/) > Employers' obligations
in Ireland

#  Employers' obligations in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Contracts and terms of employment 
  * Tax and PRSI 
  * Managing your employment records 
  * Health and safety in the workplace 
  * Disciplinary procedures and dismissal 
  * Redundancy 
  * General Data Protection Regulation(GDPR) obligations 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Employers must ensure that their employees receive certain basic employment
rights. These rights are set by [ employment legislation
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-
duties/employment-laws-in-ireland/) .

If you employ people or are setting up a business that will employ people, you
need to know your responsibilities and your [ employees’ rights
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-
duties/employee-rights-and-entitlements/) .

In this page, we focus on your duties to your employees.

###  Who is considered an employee?

Employers hire people on two different types of contract:

  * **Contracts of service** : the person is an employee and is protected by employment legislation. 
  * **Contracts for service** : the person is an independent or self-employed contractor. They are not considered employees and may not be protected by all employment legislation. 

The difference between these types of contract can sometimes be unclear.
However, the type of contract can have serious implications for the employer
and employee for employment protection legislation, taxation and social
welfare.

You can find out more about [ different types of employment
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/different-types-of-workers/) , [ part-
time workers ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/rights-of-part-time-
workers/) , [ agency workers ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/agency-
workers/) and [ workers on fixed-term or specified purpose contracts
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/rights-of-fixed-term-workers/) .

###  Employment services and supports

Intreo is a service from the [ Department of Social Protection
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Intreo_home.aspx) that provides a single
point of contact for all employment and income supports.

Services for employers include:

  * [ Jobs Ireland ](https://www.jobsireland.ie/) – an employment service which gives employers access to jobseekers 
  * Financial support for employers who create new and additional jobs through [ JobsPlus ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/jobsplus/) and similar schemes 
  * Workplace supports to help employees with disabilities, including the [ Wage Subsidy Scheme ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/) and the  Employee Retention Scheme 

##  Contracts and terms of employment

If your employees are working for a regular wage or salary, they automatically
have a contract of employment. The full contract of employment does not have
to be put in writing. However, your employee must receive a written statement
of the **core terms of employment** within the first 5 days of starting a job.

You must provide the employee with a statement of the remaining terms within
one month of them starting work. You can get more details in our page [
contract of employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) .

You should outline most terms and conditions of employment in a written
contract or a company handbook. However, custom and practice in the workplace
can also count as a term of employment (for example, a mid-morning break of 10
minutes).

If you want to change a term or condition of employment, you must agree this
change with the employee. Under contract law, both the employer and the
employee must agree to [ changes in the terms of a contract
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/change-job-contract/) . You can read more about [ contracts of
employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/contract-of-employment/) .

###  Rates of pay

Most workers are entitled to [ minimum wage (€12.70 per hour)
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/) . However, there are some exceptions to this, such as apprentices,
people aged under 20 and people employed by close relatives.

You must give your employees [ payslips ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/pay-and-employment/pay-slip/) . These show their wages and any
deductions that have been made.

###  Hours of work, breaks and rest periods

You are responsible for making sure your employees are given breaks while at
work. The Organisation of Working Time Act 1997 outlines the rules governing [
maximum working hours ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/hours-
of-work/working-hours/) and [ daily and weekly rest breaks
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/hours-of-work/work-breaks-
and-rest-periods/) .

###  Leave

Nearly all employees are entitled to [ annual leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-
leave/) and [ public holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/public-holidays/) , from the time they start
work. Most employees are entitled to 4 weeks’ paid annual leave for each leave
year. Part-time workers’ are generally entitled to 8% of the hours they have
worked, up to a maximum of 4 working weeks for each leave year.

You can decide when your employees take annual leave, taking into
consideration work and personal requirements. However, you should consult your
employee or their union before the leave is due to be taken. Your employee can
request pay for annual leave in advance.

You must let employees take statutory protective leave. This includes:

  * [ Maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/)
  * [ Paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/)
  * [ Health and safety leave ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/)
  * [ Parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/)
  * [ Parent's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/)
  * [ Adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/)
  * [ Carer’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/)
  * [ Sick leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/)
  * [ Leave for medical care ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/)
  * [ Force majeure leave ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-work/#48e41d)
  * [ Domestic violence leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/domestic-violence-leave/)

There is specific legislation setting down the rules for each entitlement.

##  Tax and PRSI

You are responsible for deducting the correct amount of tax, PRSI and
Universal Social Charge from your employees’ wages and remitting these to
Revenue using the PAYE system. You also [ pay employer’s PRSI contributions
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-
social-insurance/) .

You must [ register as an employer with Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/business/employers-paye.html) . You can read the [
Employer’s Guide to PAYE (pdf). ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-
professionals/tdm/income-tax-capital-gains-tax-corporation-
tax/part-42/42-04-35a.pdf) You can get information about PRSI on welfare.ie.

##  Managing your employment records

You must comply with your data protection obligations when collecting CVs and
related information about individuals. General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) has not affected your legal obligations set out in employment law.

For example, you must continue to keep certain data, such as records of
employees’ working hours and rates of pay. These employee records show that
you are following employment legislation.

During [ inspections by the Workplace Relations Commission
](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/enforcement-employment-rights-
legislation/) , you must allow the inspectors access to these records.

See [ workplacerelations.ie ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/) for a [
guide to how inspections are carried out (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/employers_guide_to_inspections.pdf)
.

Under data protection legislation, employees can find out what information an
organisation holds about them by making a request to [ access personal data
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/know-your-rights/right-access-
information) . You must have procedures in place to respond to such a request
within one month. This period can be extended by a further 2 months if there
are a lot of requests or if the requests are complex.

##  Health and safety in the workplace

###  Preventing accidents

As an employer you must, as far as is reasonably practicable, ensure [
employees’ safety, health and welfare at work ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-work/) . This is
outlined in the [ Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2005/act/10/enacted/en/print) .

To prevent workplace injuries and illness you must:

  * Provide and keep safe workplaces, machinery and equipment 
  * reduce the chance of risks when using any item or substance and from exposure to physical agents, noise and vibration 
  * Prevent any improper conduct or behaviour which might put the safety, health and welfare of employees at risk (for example, ‘horseplay’ or bullying at work) 
  * Provide instruction and training to employees on health and safety 
  * Provide protective clothing and equipment to employees at no cost to employees. (This does not apply if the person is self-employed) 
  * Appoint a suitable person as the organisation’s safety officer 

If you are an employer, you must carry out a risk assessment for yourr
workplace.

A risk assessment should:

  * Identify any hazards in the workplace 
  * Assess the risks associated with these hazards 
  * Identify the steps needed to deal with these risk 

You must also prepare a safety statement based on the risk assessment.

Tools to help you with these tasks are provided by the [ Health and Safety
Authority ](http://www.hsa.ie/) .

###  Reporting accidents

You must report any accident that results in an employee missing 3 consecutive
days at work (not including the day of the accident) to the Health and Safety
Authority.

Non-fatal accidents or dangerous occurrences should be reported on within 10
working days of the event.

The HSA has a [ guide on reporting accidents and dangerous occurrences (pdf)
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/topics/accident_and_dangerous_occurrence_reporting/accident_and_dangerous_occurrences_reporting_2022.pdf)
.

##  Disciplinary procedures and dismissal

As an employer, you should have written grievance and disciplinary procedures
in place. Disciplinary procedures set out the stages and processes you will
follow when dealing with the alleged shortcomings of an employee.

These procedures are outlined by the Workplace Relations Commission in their [
Code of Practice: Grievance and Disciplinary Procedures
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/cop3/)
.

Generally, the procedures allow for informal warnings, followed by written
warnings and ultimately to dismissal. Under the Unfair Dismissals Acts you
must give employees written notice of these procedures before [ dismissing
them ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/)
.

You must give your employees a copy of your grievance and disciplinary
procedures within 28 days of their start date. If you are considering
dismissing an employee, you must follow fair procedures.

These include:

  * Giving your employee appropriate warnings 
  * Making them fully aware of the allegations against them, and 
  * Giving them an opportunity to present their side 

You must also give them the opportunity to be represented in any disciplinary
procedures by, for example, a trade union official or other representative.

If you do dismiss an employee, you must be able to show you had [ fair grounds
for dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/fair-
grounds-for-dismissal/) and followed fair procedures.

##  Redundancy

If your business closes or you are reducing staff numbers, you may need to
make employees redundant. You may have to do this because there is a lack of
work, or if you are reorganising the business, or if you business is
struggling financially. When making an employee redundant, you must follow
certain [ procedures ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-procedures/) .

You can read more about [ redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/what-is-redundancy/) . You can also find information in
our document on [ closing or selling a business ](/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/closing-a-business/) .

##  General Data Protection Regulation(GDPR) obligations

Employers have increased obligations and responsibilities on how they collect,
use and protect personal data under the [ General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/overview-of-general-data-
protection-regulation/) .

If you use CCTV in the workplace or monitor your employees’ use of email,
internet and the phone, you can find useful information in our page on [
surveillance in the workplace ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/data-protection-at-work/surveillance-in-the-workplace/) .

If your employees are working with children or vulnerable adults, they must be
vetted by the Garda Síochána [ National Vetting Bureau
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-
work/garda-vetting/) .

You can read more about [ data protection in the workplace.
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-
work/data-protection-in-the-workplace/)

##  More information

  * Workplace Relations Commission’s [ Information and Customer Service ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) – and see its guide for employers, [ Employment Law Explained (pdf) ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/employment-law-explained.pdf) , and [ general guide to employment law (pdf) ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/guide_to_employment_labour_and_equality_law_18.pdf)
  * [ IBEC ](http://www.ibec.ie/) (Irish Business and Employers Confederation) 
  * [ ISME ](http://www.isme.ie/) (Irish Small and Medium Enterprises Association) 
  * [ Small Firms Association ](http://www.sfa.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 13 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employer-
obligations/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employers%27%20obligations%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employer-
obligations/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employer-
obligations/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employers%27%20obligations%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employer-
obligations/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

826.72675

  * [ _Employment laws in Ireland_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employment-laws-in-ireland/)

Summary of the main employment legislation in Ireland.

765.74133

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

680.9712

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

