**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Pay and employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/) > Minimum wage

#  Minimum wage

  * Introduction 
  * What counts as pay? 
  * What does not count as pay? 
  * Workers not entitled to minimum wage 
  * Current minimum rates of pay 
  * My employer cannot pay me the minimum wage 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Living wage for all 
  * Contact the WRC 

##  Introduction

Generally, the amount of pay you get for working is agreed between you and
your employer. Pay negotiations normally happen when you get a job offer.

However, most employees are entitled to a minimum wage under the [ National
Minimum Wage Act 2000
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/pub/0005/index.html) .

Since 1 January 2024, the national minimum wage is €12.70 per hour. Some
people get sub-minimum rates, such as people [ aged under 20
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/young-people-at-work/rights-of-young-workers/) (see the ‘Rates’ section
below).

The national minimum wage does not stop an employer from offering you a higher
wage. You cannot agree to be paid less than the minimum wage or to do unpaid
work unless you are employed by a close family relative or are on a [
recognised apprenticeship
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/apprenticeships/) .

###  Different rates of pay for certain sectors

Employees in certain sectors have other minimum rates of pay, for example, the
security and cleaning sectors. The rules for these sectors are set out in [
Employment agreements and orders ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/employment-agreements-and-
orders/) made by [ Joint Labour Committees ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/joint-labour-committees/)
.  
  
Even if the hourly pay rates are set out in an Employment Regulation Order
(ERO), an employer must pay their employees at least the legal minimum wage.

##  What counts as pay?

For the minimum wage, your gross wage (your total pay before any money is
deducted, such as tax or pension contributions) includes:

  * Your normal basic pay 
  * Any shift premium 
  * Any fee, bonus or commission 
  * Service charges given through the payroll 
  * Zero Hours payments 

If you get **food** (known as board) or **accommodation** (known as lodgings)
**from your employer** , the following amounts are included in the minimum
wage calculation:

  * Board rates: €1.14 an hour 
  * Lodging rates: €30 a week or €4.28 a day 

Employers must pay a minimum wage to work experience placements, work trials,
internships and any other employment practice involving unpaid work or working
for room and board.

###  **How is my hourly rate calculated?**

Your hourly rate is calculated by dividing your gross pay by the total number
of hours you have worked. This is set out in the National Minimum Wage Act
2000 [ Section 20
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/pub/0005/sec0020.html#partiii-
sec20) .

However, it must be clear:

  * What pay is included 
  * Which hours are included as working hours 
  * The pay reference period (whether you are paid weekly, fortnightly or monthly) 

###  **Working hours**

Your working hours are whichever is longer between:

  * The number of hours set out in any document, such as your [ employment contract ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) , collective agreement, or statement of terms of employment given to you under the [ Terms of Employment (Information) Act 1994-2014 (as amended) ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0005/index.html)
  * The actual number of hours you worked or were available for work and get paid for 

Your working hours include overtime and travel time where this is part of the
job. Time spent on training that your employer approved and during normal
working hours, is also included.

Your working hours do not include the time you are:

  * On standby other than at the workplace 
  * On leave, lay-off, strike, or after payment instead of notice 
  * Travelling to or from work 

###  **Pay reference period**

Your employer selects the period, known as the pay reference period, to
calculate the average hourly pay – for example, a week, fortnight, or month
(but no longer than a month).

Your employer must include details of the pay reference period in your
statement of employment conditions, as set out in the [ Terms of Employment
(Information) Act 1994-2014 (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0005/index.html) .

You can ask your employer for a written statement of your average rate of pay
for any pay reference period within the last 12 months. The employer has **4
weeks** to give you the statement.

##  What does not count as pay?

When calculating the minimum wage, do not include:

  * Overtime premium 
  * Call-out premium 
  * Unsocial hours premium 
  * Premiums for working public holidays, Saturdays or Sundays 
  * Allowances for special or additional duties 
  * On-call or standby allowances 
  * Service pay (tips paid directly to you) 
  * Tips placed in a central fund and paid as part of your wages 
  * Certain payments you get when absent from work, for example sick pay, holiday pay or pay during health and safety leave 
  * Payments you get when leaving your job, including on retirement 
  * Contributions paid by your employer into any occupational pension scheme available to you 
  * [ Redundancy payments ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-payments/)
  * An advance payment of, for example, your salary. The advance is taken into account for the period you would normally have got it 
  * Payment-in-kind or benefit-in-kind (except board or lodgings) 
  * Payment not connected with your employment 
  * Compensation for injury or loss of tools 
  * An award as part of a staff suggestion scheme 
  * A loan given to you by your employer 

##  Workers not entitled to minimum wage

You are not entitled to get the national minimum wage if you are:

  * Employed by a close relative (for example, a spouse, civil partner or parent) 
  * In a statutory apprenticeship 
  * Aged under 20 (see ‘Rates’ below) 

##  Current minimum rates of pay

Since 1 January 2024, the national minimum wage is €12.70 per hour.

Some people get sub-minimum rates, see rates below.

###  Rates on or after January 2024

**Age group** |  **Minimum hourly rate of pay** |  **% of minimum wage**  
---|---|---  
20 and over  |  €12.70  |  100%   
19  |  €11.43  |  90%   
18  |  €10.16  |  80%   
Under 18  |  €8.89  |  70%   
  
##  My employer cannot pay me the minimum wage

If your employer cannot afford to pay the minimum wage due to financial
difficulty, the Labour Court can give them permission, or _exempt_ them from
paying the minimum wage rate for between 3 months and one year. Only one
exemption is allowed.

The employer must apply to the Labour Court for the exemption, and they must
have the agreement of a majority of employees. The employer and the employees
must all agree to follow the decision of the Labour Court.

The employer must show that they are unable to pay the minimum wage and that
if they had to pay it, they would need to lay off or dismiss employees.

Employers can only be exempt from paying the full rate of the minimum wage.
They cannot be exempt from paying the reduced rate (for example, to employees
under 18).

###  Victimisation

If you ask your employer to pay the minimum wage, you are protected by law
from [ victimisation ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/victimisation-
at-work/) or dismissal.

If you are dismissed for asking for the minimum wage, you can bring a claim
for [ unfair dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) . You can do this no matter how long
you have worked for your employer or how many hours you work each week.

If you are due an increase under the National Minimum Wage Act, your employer
may try to cut your working hours to avoid an increase in the overall cost of
your pay. However, they cannot do this without also reducing your duties or
the amount of work.

##  How to make a complaint

If you are not getting the minimum wage, you should speak with your employer
first.

If you cannot resolve the problem with your employer, you can complete the [
online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/complaints_disputes/refer_a_dispute_make_a_complaint/)
on [ workplacerelations.ie
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

This form gives you 2 options, you can:

  1. Request an investigation by an inspector from the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC). The inspector will investigate your claim that the minimum wage is not being paid. 
  2. Refer a dispute to a WRC adjudicator. However, you can only do this after asking your employer for a statement outlining the calculation of the average hourly pay. You must refer the dispute within 6 months of getting the statement. If necessary, the time limit can be extended to a maximum of 12 months. Where your employer has not given you the statement, the time starts from the date they should have (that is, within 4 weeks of the request). 

You cannot refer a complaint about the same dispute to both an adjudicator and
an inspector. This is set out in the National Minimum Wage Act.

###  **Victimisation cases**

If you are alleging victimisation, you should ask your employer to bring back
your working conditions to how they were before the victimisation occurred.

If your employer does not do this within 2 weeks of you asking, you can refer
your case to the WRC adjudicator. You must do this within 6 months of the
alleged victimisation (which may be extended to a maximum of 12 months).

##  Living wage for all

A national living wage will replace the national minimum wage from 2026. The
living wage will be set at 60% of the median wage in any given year.

The national minimum wage will remain in place until the 60% living wage is
fully phased in. The national minimum wage will increase over the years as
usual.

##  Contact the WRC

You can get more information on the national minimum wage from the Workplace
Relations Commission’s [ Information and Customer Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/contact_us/contact-details/) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 25 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Minimum%20wage&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Minimum%20wage&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Case study: Minimum wage_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/case-study-minimum-wage/)

When calculating the hourly rate for the national minimum wage, certain
payments are not included. This case study shows how an employer's incorrect
calculation meant the employee was being paid less than the national minimum
wage.

2228.484

  * [ _Minimum standards for rented housing_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/minimum-standards-for-rented-homes/)

Landlords are legally obliged to ensure that their properties comply with
minimum physical standards.

1188.5398

  * [ _Wage Subsidy Scheme for people with disabilities_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/)

The Wage Subsidy Scheme (WSS) offers financial support for employers who
employ people with disabilities.

1137.2057

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

