**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment and disability ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/) > Work
and Access - Workplace Needs Assessment Grant

#  Work and Access - Workplace Needs Assessment Grant

  * What is Work and Access? 
  * What is the Workplace Needs Assessment Grant? 
  * Why do I need a workplace needs assessment? 
  * Who can apply for a Workplace Needs Assessment Grant? 
  * Finding the assessor 
  * The assessment process 
  * How much is the grant? 
  * How to apply 
  * More information 

##  What is Work and Access?

[ Work and Access
](https://control.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/) is a scheme to support inclusive
employment by offering funding to adjust workplaces and make them more
accessible for people with disabilities.

Funding is available to qualifying job candidates, employees, self-employed
people, and employers.

There are 7 categories of Work and Access support:

  * Workplace Needs Assessment 
  * [ Communication Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-communication-support-grant/)
  * [ In-Work Support ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-grant/)
  * [ Personal Reader ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/personal-reader-grant/)
  * [ Work Equipment ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-grant/)
  * [ Workplace Adaptation ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)
  * [ Disability Equality and Inclusion Training ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/disability-equality-and-inclusion-training-grant/)

This page explains the Workplace Needs Assessment Grant. Depending on your
needs, you may be entitled to more than one support at the same time. Check
the [ Work and Access Programme
](https://control.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/) details in full before you apply for
any support.

##  What is the Workplace Needs Assessment Grant?

The Workplace Needs Assessment Grant provides up to €2,500 to help people with
disabilities or health conditions identify the supports they need in their
workplace to do their job effectively.

##  Why do I need a workplace needs assessment?

A workplace needs assessment helps identify necessary adjustments to remove
barriers you may face while doing your job or returning to work.

The assessment can cover working at a business premises, at home, or from a
remote working location.

You must get a specialist to do the assessment.

###  **Communication support for the assessment**

If you need communication support during the assessment, you can apply for it
(for example an interpreter).

To qualify for communication support, you must meet one of the following
criteria:

  * Be deaf or hard of hearing, needing an [ Irish Sign Language ](https://www.risli.ie/) interpreter, lip-speaker, or other deaf interpreter. 
  * Have a disability or health condition that requires communication support. 

##  Who can apply for a Workplace Needs Assessment Grant?

New or existing employees, employers or self-employed people can apply for
funding. You can make the application yourself or someone else can apply on
your behalf.

###  **How to qualify**

To qualify for the grant, you must meet the [ general eligibility criteria
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/#3f40fb) for the Work and Access
programme.

##  Finding the assessor

To apply for the Workplace Needs Assessment Grant, you must find a suitably
qualified and experienced assessor (see list below).

The assessor should have:

  * Relevant qualifications or experience 
  * A track record in occupational evaluation or workplace assessment 
  * Up-to-date knowledge of disabilities and appropriate supports, including the latest technologies. 

###  **Qualified specialists**

  * Occupational therapists 
  * Occupational psychologists 
  * Occupational physicians 
  * Occupational health nurses or other occupational health professionals 
  * Rehabilitation nurses 
  * Ergonomics specialists 
  * Chartered physiotherapists 

Assessors should be registered with a relevant professional body such as [ the
Register of Health and Social Care Professionals (CORU)
](https://www.coru.ie/) or [ The Association of Occupational Therapists.
](https://www.aoti.ie/)

Assessors from the employer’s staff or associate company can carry out the
assessment but are not eligible for funding.

##  The assessment process

The assessment should be completed by the employer, the employee, and their
advocate or representative, if appropriate.

###  **Part 1 – Assessment**

The assessor evaluates the employee's specific needs, the job role,
disability, and workplace environment when assessing the tasks involved.

###  **Part 2 – Report**

The assessment and recommendations should:

  * Outline each barrier and make evidence-based recommendations 
  * Identify necessary accommodations and training required, for example, assistive technology, hiring a Personal Reader, or In-Work Support 
  * Include additional quotes for recommended supports that require funding to ensure cost-effectiveness 

To implement the recommendations, the employer and employee may get one or
more of the support elements available through the [ Work and Access Programme
](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-programme/) .

Appendix 6 of the Department of Social Protection (DSP) Operational Guidelines
on Work and Access covers a [ Workplace Needs Assessment Report Template
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/429d6-operational-guidelines-work-and-
access/#appendices) .

The completed report must be sent to the Department of Social Protection.

##  How much is the grant?

You can get up to €2,500 to cover the costs of hiring a specialist for the
assessment.

###  **What costs are covered?**

The grant can be used to pay for:

  * Eligible costs to carry out the assessment 
  * Up to 10 hours of communication support for contact hours with the specialist, if needed (for example, an interpreter) 

##  How to apply

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) is developing an online application
process, which will be available soon.

In the meantime, follow the process below.

###  **Individuals**

To apply for any of the supports available through the Work and Access
Programme, follow these steps:

####  **Step 1: Complete the application form**

  * Request the form from your local Intreo Office or download it from gov.ie. 
  * If you are unsure about the support needed, you only complete the relevant section on the [ WA1 Form ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/297281/a9af4dab-6229-4c76-87a2-4bb3dfbfef2d.pdf#page=null) . 
  * Provide quotes to support your application (see Quotes in Appendix 6 of the Operational Guidelines). 

####  **Step 2: Eligibility check**

  * Send your completed WA1 Form by post to Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 
  * Your eligibility will be checked by the Work and Access Section 

####  **Step 3: Assessment and approval**

  * An officer will contact you directly to discuss your application. 
  * If eligible, you will be told about the next steps and any additional sections of the application form to complete. 
  * Approval for eligibility does not guarantee funding. 
  * Final approval will be made after you meet specific requirements set by Department officers. 

###  **Employers**

To apply for the Work and Access Programme as an employer, follow these steps:

####  **Step 1: Complete the application form**

  * Request the form from your local Intreo Office or download it from gov.ie. 
  * Complete the [ WA2 Form ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/297282/e5bcc9e3-27ba-4139-88c2-3f498e4079a2.pdf#page=null) . 

####  **Step 2: Submission and support details**

  * Send your completed WA2 Form by post to Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11. 

####  **Step 3: Assessment and processing**

  * A designated Employer Relations Officer (ERO) will manage your application. 
  * You will be contacted directly to discuss available options and necessary documents. 
  * Final approval is required before purchasing any support. 
  * Applications submitted after purchasing supports cannot be processed or paid. 

###  **Appeals**

Work and Access is an administrative scheme, so you have no right to appeal a
particular decision on your application.

If you are unhappy with the decision, you can ask to have your case reviewed
by another DSP officer who was not involved in the original decision.

Write to the Department of Social Protection within 21 days of the decision,
explaining why you think the decision is wrong and provide any proof you have
to support your argument.

##  More information

For more information about the Work and Access programme:

  * Read the Department of Social Protection [ Operational Guidelines for the Work and Access Programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/429d6-operational-guidelines-work-and-access/)
  * Visit your local Intreo Centre 
  * Email: [ WorkandAccess@welfare.ie ](mailto:workandaccess@welfare.ie)
  * Write to: Work and Access Section, Central Team, Finglas Intreo Centre, PO Box 13736, Freepost FDN7696, Dublin 11 

_**Page edited:** 26 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20Workplace%20Needs%20Assessment%20Grant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Work%20and%20Access%20-%20Workplace%20Needs%20Assessment%20Grant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-needs-assessment-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Adaptation Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)

The Workplace Adaptation Grant is is part of the new Work and Access
employment programme, designed to help people with disabilities find or keep a
job by removing or reducing workplace barriers.

3137.2893

  * [ _Work and Access - Workplace Equipment Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-workplace-equipment-grant/)

The Workplace Equipment Grant is part of the new Work and Access employment
programme, designed to help people with disabilities find or keep a job by
removing or reducing workplace barriers.

3132.6638

  * [ _Work and Access - In-Work Support Grant_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-in-work-support-grant/)

The In-Work Support Grantis part of the new Work and Access employment
programme, designed to help people with disabilities to find or keep a job by
removing or reducing workplace barriers.

2188.5293

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

