**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to post-primary school ](/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/) > Choosing a post-
primary school

#  Choosing a post-primary school

  * Introduction 
  * What to consider when choosing a school 
  * Types of post-primary schools 
  * Fees for school 
  * Finding a school 
  * Applying to a post-primary school 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Children usually start post-primary school when they are 12 or 13 years of
age.

Most post-primary schools (also called secondary schools) are funded by the
State and do not charge a fee. Most children attend these schools

##  What to consider when choosing a school

When choosing a school for your child, you need to know is the school:

  * Fee paying or non-fee paying 
  * Single sex or co-educational 
  * Religious or non-denominational 
  * Providing language of instruction in English or Irish 
  * Providing extracurricular activities such as sports, arts or music 

Religious denominational schools are generally Roman Catholic or Protestant.
Non-denomination are not religious run.

##  Types of post-primary schools

There are 3 types of post-primary or secondary schools:

  * **Voluntary secondary schools**
  * **Community colleges**
  * **Community schools**

Each school type has a different ownership and management. School management
boards must include parents and teacher representatives. In the past, the type
of school usually determined whether the school focus was on academic or
vocational achievements.

Schools must deliver the curriculum set by the Minister of Education. Every
school must have a [ fair policy for handling admissions ](/en/education/the-
irish-education-system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/)
and make this information available to parents.

**Voluntary secondary schools** are privately owned and managed post-primary
schools, usually under the patronage of an individual body such as a religious
community, a charitable trust or a private charitable company. The national
representative body for the boards of management of voluntary secondary
schools is the [ Joint Managerial Body ](http://www.jmb.ie/) .

**Community colleges** are established by the local Education and Training
Board (ETB). The ETB is the sole patron of the school. The national
representative body for the Education and Training Boards is the [ Education
and Training Boards Ireland. ](http://www.etbi.ie/)

**Community schools** are established either by one or more private or
religious patrons coming together with an ETB patron or as the result of the
amalgamation of voluntary secondary and ETB schools. The representative body
for the schools is the [ Association of Community and Comprehensive Schools.
](http://www.accs.ie/)

**Gaelscholaiste**

[ Gaelcholáiste ](https://gaeloideachas.ie/i-am-a-parent-pupil/starting-in-
the-gaelcholaiste/) are secondary schools that teach through Irish.
Gaelcholaiste are state funded. They may have the word _Gaelcholaiste_ in
their title.

##  Fees for school

**Non-fee-paying schools**  
The majority of post-primary schools in Ireland do not charge fees.

Non-fee-paying voluntary secondary schools, community colleges and community
schools are all funded on an annual budget by the Department of Education.
They get grants from the Department to help with their running costs. The
grants are based on the number of pupils attending the school. If the [ school
is rated as disadvantaged
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the_irish_education_system/measures_to_address_educational_disadvantage.html)
, it gets an additional grant per pupil.

**Additional school costs**  
If your child attends a non-fee-paying school, they must still pay for books
and examination fees. In addition, they may have other costs, such as school
uniforms. There are [ various schemes to help low-income families meet the
costs of schooling
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary_and_post_primary_education/educational_supports/school_books_scheme.html)
.

**Fee-paying schools**  
Fee-paying schools do not get any State grants towards their running costs.
However, the State pays the salaries of all teachers working in recognised
voluntary schools. Fees are set each year by the school.

##  Finding a school

To find a school in your area you can use the Department of Education’s [ Find
a School tool ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/find-a-school/) . You can search
the school list by ethos, gender and language of instruction (English or
Irish).

You can find out more about a school from:

  * The school website 
  * [ School inspection reports ](https://www.gov.ie/en/school-reports/)
  * School visit (it may have an open day or parents evening) 

##  Applying to a post-primary school

To apply to a school, you should contact the [ post-primary school of your
choice.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary_and_post_primary_education/going_to_post_primary_school/post_primary_education_life_event.html)

All schools must publish an [ admissions policy and admissions notice.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the_irish_education_system/admissions_policies_in_primary_and_secondary_schools.html)

The admissions policy describes the rules the school follows for selecting
students, how they make their decisions and what happens if the school is
over-subscribed.

The admissions notice tells you:

  * The date when you can apply 
  * The deadline for applications 
  * The date when you get the decision on your application 
  * The date by which you must accept a place 

###  Discrimination

Schools cannot discriminate if your child has a disability, is of a different
race or is a member of the Traveller community. Schools cannot discriminate
because of a child’s family status, sexual orientation, marital status, gender
or religion.

However, in some circumstances a school can prioritise a student of a minority
religion who wants a school providing religious instruction similar to their
religion or belief.

You can read more about [ admissions policies in schools
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the_irish_education_system/admissions_policies_in_primary_and_secondary_schools.html)
.

##  Further information

You can [ find a post-primary school ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/find-a-
school/) .

You can read about steps to [ enrol your child in secondary school
](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-
secondary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/) .

###  Department of Education

Marlborough Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 RC96  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 889 6400

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education/)

**Email:** [ info@education.gov.ie ](mailto:info@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 13 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Choosing%20a%20post-
primary%20school&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Choosing%20a%20post-
primary%20school&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-
school/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

2836.5295

  * [ _Starting post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-school/)

Describes post-primary education, including how to choose a post-primary
school and enrol your child.

2484.1624

  * [ _Resources for parents and students at post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/organisations-and-resources-for-post-primary-schools/)

A list of organisations and internet resources providing information on
education at second-level.

2395.33

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

