**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment and disability ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/) >
Working with a disability

#  Working with a disability

  * Introduction 
  * Looking for work 
  * Working with a disability 
  * Your employment rights 
  * Making a complaint about discrimination 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

If you have a disability, there are supports to help you find and keep a job.

The new [ Work and Access ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-
access-programme/) employment programme aims at reducing and removing barriers
disabled people may face at work. Some supports are for those already working,
while others help those who are unemployed.

As a person with a disability, you have the same [ employment rights
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment_rights_and_conditions/)
as other employees.

##  Looking for work

If you are looking for a job for the first time or after taking a break, think
about your skills and how your disability might affect the type of work you
are applying for.

Many employers have equal opportunities policies and welcome applications from
qualified people with disabilities.

Understand your rights and what employers must do for you under equality
legislation. It is your choice to disclose your disability to potential
employers, especially if it’s not visible, like a long-term illness or a
mental health issue. However, employers cannot accommodate your needs if they
are unaware of them.

###  Supports and training

There are support schemes and training opportunities available to you if you
have a disability and are looking for work.

These include help finding a job and preparation for training programmes and
employment support provided by the Department of Social Protection under the [
Work and Access employment programme ](/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/work-and-access-programme/) .

You can also do specific skills training and traineeships if you are
unemployed and are re-entering the workforce. Training for people in
employment is offered through apprenticeships and in-company training.

If you are completing a training course and need more intensive support than
would normally be available, the course will be delivered by specialist
training providers. Some key features of specialist training include adapted
equipment, a more individual approach and longer training sessions.

###  **EmployAbility Service**

The [ EmployAbility Service ](/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-disabilities/) helps you find
and keep a job, offering ongoing support and job coaches through various
organisations around the country.

###  Disability payments and work

If you get certain disability payments, such as [ Disability Allowance (DA)
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) and [ Blind
Pension (BP), ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-
pension/) you may be allowed to [ work and keep your payment. ](/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-work/)

Employers can apply for the [ Wage Subsidy Scheme ](/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/) whether or
not an employee keeps their entitlement to DA or BP.

If you are getting an [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/illness-benefit/) or [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) and you want to return to
work, you may qualify for [ Partial Capacity Benefit. ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/partial-capacity-benefit/)

**Employment schemes**

Several [ employment schemes ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/) and
supports encourage long-term unemployed people to return to work. Each scheme
has different rules, so it is important to check the detailed information
about each scheme so check the specific details and how they may affect your
social welfare payment.

**Other employment support**

If you want to [ start your own business ](/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/) , you may be eligible for the
[ Back to Work Enterprise Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments-and-work/back-to-work-enterprise-allowance/) . The scheme encourages
unemployed people, lone parents and people getting Disability Allowance or
Blind Person's Pension to take up self-employment.

##  Working with a disability

###  **If you develop a disability**

If you develop a disability while in your job (through an accident or illness)
discuss your options with your employer.

Depending on your disability and job type, you may need workplace adaptations
or special equipment.

If returning to your previous job is not possible, explore other employment
options mentioned under ‘Looking for work’ above.

###  **If your disability changes or you need more support**

If your disability progresses, discuss your needs with your employer.
Potential discussions may include job adaptations, workplace changes and
modified working conditions.

###  Options at work

Employers are obliged to make reasonable accommodations for employees with
disabilities, which may include:

  * **Partial re-deployment:** continuing part of your original job with new tasks. 
  * **Re-deployment:** moving to a different role with retraining. 
  * **Flexible working arrangements:** options like part-time, flexitime, job sharing, or remote work. 
  * **Adapting the workplace:** ensuring accessibility and providing assistive technology. 

###  **Supports for employers**

Various support schemes are available for employers hiring or retaining
employees with disabilities. These are provided by the Department of Social
Protection under the [ Work and Access employment programme
](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/work-and-access-programme/) .

##  Your employment rights

People with disabilities have the same [ employment rights
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) as other employees. You are protected by quality legislation
which prohibits discrimination based on disability. Employers must make
reasonable accommodations for employees with disabilities.

###  **Equality legislation**

The [ Employment Equality Acts 1998-2015
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1998/act/21/front/revised/en/html)
makes it illegal to discriminate based on a disability in employment, training
and recruitment.

However, an employer is not obliged to hire or keep someone who cannot fully
carry out their job.

###  **Reasonable accommodation**

Employers must take reasonable steps to accommodate employees with
disabilities, which can include job modifications and workplace changes.

Under [ EU law ](http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32000L0078:EN:HTML) ,
employers are not required to make accommodations if the cost is excessive.

You can [ read about reasonable accommodation
](https://www.employersforchange.ie/Reasonable-Accommodation) on the Employers
for Change website.

###  **Health and safety**

Employers must ensure the [ safety, health and welfare of all employees
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-work/) , including making
accommodations for those with disabilities. This includes adjustments to
doors, passageways, staircases, showers, washbasins, toilets, and
workstations.

This is covered under the [ Safety, Health and Welfare at Work Act 2005
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2005/act/10/revised/en/html) .

###  **Public service quota**

Public bodies must set aside a certain percentage of jobs for people with
disabilities, as outlined in the [ Disability Act 2005
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2005/en/act/pub/0014/index.html) .  
  
From 1 January 2024 to 31 December 2024, at least 4.5% of employees must be
people with disabilities. From 1 January 1 2025, this percentage increases to
at least 6%.

##  Making a complaint about discrimination

If you think you have been discriminated against due to your disability, you
can [ make a complaint to the Workplace Relations Commission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/disputes-about-equality-and-discrimination/) using the [ online
complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

You can also read the [ guide to taking an employment equality case
](https://communitylawandmediation.ie/publications/employment-equality-acts/)
from the Community Law and Mediation (CLM) website. CLM also offers [ free
legal information, advice and mediation services
](https://communitylawandmediation.ie/services/) .  

##  More information

For more resources and support:

  * [ **Work and Access** ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/47db8-work-and-access-supports/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/workandaccess/) **:** an Employment Programme offering support to help people with a disability get a job or stay in work. 
  * [ **AHEAD** ](http://www.ahead.ie/graduate) : information for employees and employers, including reasonable accommodations and work placements for graduates with disabilities. 
  * [ **Employers for Change** ](https://www.employersforchange.ie/Contact-Us) : guidance on disability, inclusive recruitment, and workplace management. 
  * [ **Health and Safety Authority** ](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/publications_and_forms/publications/safety_and_health_management/employees_with__disabilities.html) : guide to inclusive health and safety practices for employees with disabilities. 
  * **Eastern Vocational Enterprises (E.V.E.)** : [ 'Just Ask - a Handbook for Employers and Employees' (pdf) ](https://www.eve.ie/download/518/Just%20Ask_English%20Booklet_2009.pdf) for mental health support. 
  * [ **Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission** ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-and-rights/irish-human-rights-and-equality-commission/) : information on equality and discrimination issues in the workplace. 

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/working-with-a-disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Working%20with%20a%20disability&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/working-with-a-disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/working-with-a-disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Working%20with%20a%20disability&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
and-disability/working-with-a-disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-disability/)

Grants for alterations that need to be made to a home to make it suitable for
a person with a physical, sensory or intellectual disability or a mental
health difficulty.

1435.3556

  * [ _Caring for a child with a disability_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/caring-for-a-child-with-a-disability/)

Find out what supports and services are available to parents, guardians and
carers of children with disabilities

1280.5933

  * [ _Assessment of need for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-disabilites/)

The Disability Act 2005 provides for the Assessment of Need for people with
disabilities. Find out how the assessment is carried out.

1252.0372

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

