**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Employment support schemes ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/) > Basic Income for the Arts (BIA)

#  Basic Income for the Arts (BIA)

  * What is the Basic Income for the Arts (BIA)? 
  * Selection process 
  * Rates 
  * How does the pilot scheme work? 
  * More information 

##  What is the Basic Income for the Arts (BIA)?

The new [ Basic Income for the Arts (BIA) pilot scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/27aed-irelands-basic-income-for-the-
arts-pilot-scheme-launched-by-government/) aims to support the arts and
creative practice by giving a payment of €325 a week to artists and creative
arts workers.

The main objective of the scheme is to address the financial instability faced
by many working in the arts.

**The pilot scheme closed for applications on 12 May 2022** . 2,000 eligible
artists and creative arts workers were selected at random and invited to take
part in the pilot scheme.

The anonymised randomised selection of participants was held on 29 August
2022. Successful applicants were [ notified ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/2a6d0-groundbreaking-basic-income-for-the-arts-pilot-scheme-grants-
awarded/) on 8 September 2022.

The pilot runs over 3 years, from 2022 to 2025.

You should check the [ BIA guidelines
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/09cf6-basic-income-for-the-arts-pilot-
scheme/) for the most up to date information.

##  Selection process

Approximately 2,000 eligible applicants were selected to participate in the
pilot scheme.

Once you meet the eligibility criteria, you were included in an anonymised
random sampling process. A randomiser software was used to select participants
at random. The sample was checked to ensure adequate representation.

The anonymised randomised selection of participants was held on 29 August
2022. You should have received notification of the [ outcome of your
application ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/09cf6-basic-income-for-the-arts-
pilot-scheme/) on 8 September 2022.

##  Rates

The BIA grant is €325 a week. Payments are made monthly.

The pilot runs over 3 years, from 2022 to 2025. As this is a research pilot
there is no guarantee that funding will continue after the pilot.

###  Taxation of BIA payments

The payment is taxable, but the amount of tax paid depends on your individual
circumstances.

You need to [ register with Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-
assessment-and-self-employment/guide-to-self-assessment/index.aspx) as self-
employed and pay Schedule D income tax, where appropriate, on the BIA payment.
Income from the pilot will be liable for USC and Class S PRSI.

You are entitled to earn additional income, which would also be reckonable for
the purposes of income tax.

You can get more information about the [ tax treatment of BIA payments
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/ebrief/2022/no-2202022.aspx)
from Revenue.

###  Social welfare treatment

Income from the scheme is treated as income from self-employment for the
purpose of various means tests.

If you are in receipt of a social welfare payment and receive payments from
the pilot scheme, you should advise the Department of Social Protection (DSP)
of this change in your circumstances.

Read more about how the [ BIA interacts with DSP payments
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/bd818-interaction-of-the-basic-income-for-
the-arts-pilot-scheme-with-dsp-payments/) .

##  How does the pilot scheme work?

The pilot scheme evaluates the impact of a basic income on artists and
creative arts workers. The pilot programme collects and analyses data from BIA
recipients and a control group throughout the pilot.

If you were selected to participate on BIA, you will:

  * Take part in the pilot research programme for 3 years (2022 to 2025) 
  * Engage in ongoing data collection as part of the pilot to determine the impact of the grant payment 

You can read more about the [ type of data you need to collect and share
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/29337-basic-income-for-the-arts-pilot-
scheme-guidelines-for-applicants/#participants-data-collection-requirements)
if you were selected to participate in the BIA pilot.

###  The control group

A number of eligible applicants who were not selected to receive the payment
were asked to participate in a control group. Control group participants
respond to the same survey and data requests as those in receipt of the
payment.

If you participate in the control group, you are paid two weeks basic income
for each of the 3 years of the pilot scheme. This means you get 6 weeks of the
BIA payment to compensate you for the time required to engage in the data
collection process.

##  More information

You can read the detailed [ scheme guidelines
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/29337-basic-income-for-the-arts-pilot-
scheme-guidelines-for-applicants/) or the FAQ page [ Basic Income for the Arts
Pilot Scheme - FAQs ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/6d4e1-basic-income-
for-the-arts-pilot-scheme-faqs/) for more information about BIA.

You can contact the Basic Income for the Arts Pilot Scheme team by email at [
basicincomeforthearts@tcagsm.gov.ie
](mailto:basicincomeforthearts@tcagsm.gov.ie) .

_**Page edited:** 11 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/basic-income-
arts/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Basic%20Income%20for%20the%20Arts%20%28BIA%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/basic-income-
arts/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/basic-income-
arts/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Basic%20Income%20for%20the%20Arts%20%28BIA%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/basic-income-
arts/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Basic Income Support for Sustainability Scheme for farmers_ ](/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-for-sustainability-scheme-for-farmers/)

The Basic Income Support for Sustainability Scheme (BISS) will provide
financial supports to farmers for farming sustainably.

2397.6497

  * [ _Disability payments and the Arts and Disability Connect fund_ ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-art-council-grants/)

Information on how the Arts and Disability Connect fund can affect your
disability payment and any extra benefits you are getting.

1908.8947

  * [ _Basic bank accounts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/standard-bank-account/)

Basic bank accounts are simple bank accounts with no fees or charges for
normal services. This document gives information on the introduction of basic
bank accounts.

1301.2424

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

