**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Paternity leave

#  Paternity leave

  * What is paternity leave? 
  * Who can take paternity leave? 
  * Paternity leave and pay 
  * When can I take paternity leave? 
  * Other rules about paternity leave 
  * Other leave for parents 
  * How to apply for paternity leave 
  * Having problems taking paternity leave 
  * More information 

##  What is paternity leave?

Paternity leave gives new parents 2 weeks off work. You can take time off if
you are employed or self-employed, and can start the leave any time in the
first 6 months after the baby's birth. You can also take paternity leave when
you adopt a child.

Usually, fathers take paternity leave. Paternity leave is also available to
same-sex couples.

Your employer does not have to pay you during paternity leave, but you may
qualify for Paternity Benefit.

The legislation on paternity leave is set out in the [ Paternity Leave and
Benefit Act 2016
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2016/act/11/enacted/en/html) .

##  Who can take paternity leave?

Relevant parents can take paternity leave. These are:

  * The father of the child 
  * The partner (spouse, civil partner or cohabitant) of the mother of the child 
  * The parent of a donor-conceived child 

For an adopted child, the relevant parent is the **parent who is not the**
**_qualifying adopter_ ** for adoptive leave. This means one of you can take
adoption leave and the other paternity leave. If you are adopting alone you
can take paternity leave if you are not taking adoptive leave.

You can take 2 weeks’ paternity leave from full-time, casual or part-time
employment. It does not matter how long you have been working for your
employer or how many hours you work a week.

##  Paternity leave and pay

###  Social welfare

If you have enough PRSI contributions, you can get [ Paternity Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/) from the
Department of Social Protection (DSP).

###  Your employer

Employers do not have to pay employees who are on paternity leave. You should
check your contract of employment to see whether you can get pay and pension
contributions from your employer during paternity leave.

Your contract could give you the right to pay from your employer, in addition
to Paternity Benefit while you are on paternity leave. For example, your
employer may top up the amount you get from Paternity Benefit to match your
normal pay.

##  When can I take paternity leave?

You can choose to take paternity leave at any time in the 26 weeks after the
birth or adoption. You need to give your employer notice that you want to take
paternity leave and specify the dates you plan to take. You must do this in
writing at least 4 weeks before your leave.

You must provide a certificate from your partner’s doctor stating when your
baby is due, or stating the baby’s actual date of birth if you apply for leave
after the birth.

If you are adopting, you must provide a certificate of placement showing the
date when the child was placed with you.

##  Other rules about paternity leave

###  Multiple births

If more than one child is born or adopted at the same time (such as twins),
you can only take one single period of 2 weeks’ paternity leave.

###  Can I postpone paternity leave?

You can postpone paternity leave if, for example, the birth is later than
expected or if there is a delay in the placement of an adopted child.

If you are sick before your paternity leave starts, you can postpone the
paternity leave until you recover. You should notify your employer in writing
and provide evidence of your illness.

If your baby is hospitalised, you can ask your employer in writing if you can
postpone all or part of your paternity leave.

###  Premature births

If your baby is born prematurely (before the paternity leave is due to begin),
and you want to change your leave dates, you should send a letter from your
employer confirming the new leave dates and the date of birth of your child to
the Paternity Benefit Section. If you are self-employed you must send a letter
to the Paternity Benefit section stating your new leave dates and a letter
from a doctor or the hospital confirming the date of birth of your child.

###  Stillbirths

If your partner has a stillbirth or miscarriage any time after the 24th week
of pregnancy, or after your baby has a birth weight of at least 500 grams, you
are entitled to paternity leave.

To apply for Paternity Benefit following a [ stillbirth
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth_family_relationships/miscarriage_and_stillbirth/)
, you need to send a letter from your doctor with the Paternity Benefit
application form. The letter must state the expected date of birth, the actual
date of birth and the number of weeks of pregnancy.

###  Death of a parent

Fathers may be entitled to [ maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) or [ adoptive leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-
leave/) if the mother dies. The number of weeks you can take as leave depends
on how many weeks after the birth the mother dies. The leave starts within 7
days of the mother’s death.

If you have not already taken paternity leave, you can take it at the end of
this maternity leave or adoptive leave.

If the parent entitled to paternity leave dies, the surviving parent may be
able to use their paternity leave.

###  Returning to work

By law, you have the right to return to the same job with the same contract of
employment. If this would be too difficult for your employer to arrange, then
they must provide you with suitable alternative work. The terms of your new
job must not be ‘less favourable’ than those of your previous job.

When you take paternity leave, the law protects you against [ penalisation
](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/victimisation-at-work/) and [ unfair
dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-
dismissal/) . If you have a dispute with your employer over paternity rights,
you can complain to the Workplace Relations Commission – see ‘Having problems
taking paternity leave’ below.

##  Other leave for parents

Various types of statutory [ leave are available for parents
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/leave-
for-parents/) . You may be entitled to:

  * [ Parental leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/) : Gives parents the right to take 26 weeks’ unpaid leave from work to look after their children aged under 12 
  * [ Parent's leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/) : Gives parents the right to take 9 weeks’ leave during the first 2 years of a child’s life, or in the case of adoption, within 2 years of the placement of the child with the family 
  * [ Adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/) : For one parent of the adoptive couple, or a parent adopting alone 
  * [ Force majeure leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-leave-from-work/) : For people who need to take time off work urgently because of an injury or illness of a close family member 
  * [ Carer’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/carers-leave/) : For people who need to take time off work to provide full-time care for someone who needs it, for a while 

###  Can I take additional paternity leave?

Your employer may allow you to have additional paid or unpaid time off work
after the birth or adoption of a child. These individual arrangements are not
covered by employment law and it is your employer’s decision. You should ask
for this leave in writing before the birth or adoption

##  How to apply for paternity leave

###  Applying for paternity leave

You should apply to your employer in writing at least 4 weeks before taking
your paternity leave. You must provide one of the following:

  * A doctor’s certificate stating when your baby is due 
  * Confirmation of the actual date of birth, if you are applying for leave after the birth 
  * A letter confirming the date of the child’s placement, if you are adopting a child 

###  Applying for Paternity Benefit

You should apply for [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/paternity-benefit/) at least 4 weeks before the date you intend to
start your paternity leave. If you are self-employed, you should apply 12
weeks before. You can apply for Paternity Benefit online at [ mywelfare.ie
](https://www.mywelfare.ie/Account/Login) .

##  Having problems taking paternity leave

If you have a problem taking your paternity leave, you should raise it with
your employer first. If you cannot resolve the issue directly with your
employer, you can make a formal complaint to the Workplace Relations
Commission (WRC).

###  How to make a complaint to the WRC

If you have a dispute with your employer about paternity leave, or face
dismissal over paternity rights, you can make a complaint to the WRC. You
should use the [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

You should make your complaint within 6 months of the dispute taking place.
The time limit may be extended for up to a further 6 months, if there was
reasonable cause for the delay.

##  More information

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

###  Paternity Benefit Section

Department of Social Protection

McCarter's Road  
Buncrana  
Donegal  
Ireland  
F93 CH79

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 or 0818 690 690

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-paternity-benefit/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-paternity-benefit/)

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Paternity%20leave&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Paternity%20leave&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Presumption of paternity_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/presumption-of-paternity/)

What is presumption of paternity? Find out why it might be necessary to prove
paternity, and how to do it.

1082.824

  * [ _Leave for parents_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/leave-for-parents/)

Overview of the different types of statutory leave entitlements available for
working parents.

1078.902

  * [ _Case study: force majeure leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-leave/)

Example of 2 different requests for force majeure leave, one of which was
granted. The second request was refused as there was no entitlement under the
Parental Leave Act 1998.

967.7789

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

