**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Third-level education ](/en/education/third-level-education/) > [ Applying
to college ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/) >
Third-level courses and mature students

#  Third-level courses and mature students

  * What is a mature student? 
  * Study options for mature students 
  * College entry requirements for mature students 
  * Fees for mature students 
  * Applying for college as a mature student 
  * More information 

##  What is a mature student?

You are normally a mature student if you are:

  * At least 23 years of age on 1 January the year you start your course, and 
  * You are starting college for the first time 

Sometimes, if you started but didn’t finish your course, you can still be
considered a mature student if you are aged 23 or over. However, you won’t get
a student grant unless you have completed a full break in studies of at least
5 years. You should contact the Admissions Office in [ the college where you
want to study ](https://www.iua.ie/ourwork/access/mature-students/) for
information about entering as a mature student because different colleges have
different requirements and entry routes.

Depending on your course and circumstances, as a mature student you may
qualify for a student grant or help with fees (see ‘University access
programmes’ and ‘Fees for mature students’ below).

##  Study options for mature students

###  **Full-time study**

Third-level colleges reserve a small number of places for mature students who
want to do a full-time course.

This means that you will compete for your place on a different basis to those
who are just leaving school. The number of places reserved for mature students
is limited.

If you choose a full-time course, you will be expected to attend classes or
lectures every day and you will be assessed in the same way as the other
students on your course.

Many colleges and universities hold information events for people who want to
study as mature students. The Qualifax website has a calendar of [ career
events ](https://www.qualifax.ie/events) that take place during the year.

###  **Part-time options**

If you don’t want to study full-time, there are other options available
including:

  * Part-time courses 
  * Modular programmes 
  * Distance learning, online courses and hybrid courses 

If you choose to study on a part-time or modular basis, you can spread your
studies over a number of years. This gives you the opportunity to organise
your time and to study when it is most convenient for you.

It will take longer to complete than a full-time course, but it has the
advantage that it allows you to work at your own pace, gradually building
credits towards your qualification. Credits measure the amount of work needed
to complete a course, and credits earned represent the progress you have made
towards getting a degree.

####  **Modular programmes**

A [ modular programme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5eaf0-modular-courses/)
is made up of separate modules (self-contained units within a course). You can
study and complete each module separately at different stages during that
course.

Modular programmes can take place in a classroom setting or in a blended or
online setting. Modular courses are available at degree level in some
universities.

####  **Distance learning, online courses and hybrid courses**

Traditional distance learning takes place away from a physical classroom.
There is no tutor and you learn at your own pace. An example of traditional
distance learning is a correspondence course, where you receive the course
materials by post and study in your own time.

Online courses and learning platforms are different. Some courses can be
accessed without a tutor at any time (for example, LinkedIn Learning courses).
Others follow the traditional model of a tutor holding classes and modules
online that you can attend remotely from home or elsewhere.

Some distance learning and online courses have a blended option, sometimes
called a hybrid course, where you can choose to attend in person or remotely.
A hybrid course usually requires some in-person attendance. Students may also
come together to study for a day, a weekend, or a week at a time depending on
the course requirements.

The terms distance learning and online, blended and hybrid can be used by
colleges interchangeably, so be sure to check with your chosen college to find
out exactly how they run their courses.

###  **University access programmes**

University access programmes aim to increase the participation of under-
represented groups at third-level. They support young adults and mature
students to study at third-level colleges.

You may qualify for a [ student grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) if you are
attending an access or foundation course on the [ Department of Education’s
approved list ](https://susi.ie/undergraduate-student/approved-
institutionscourses-for-undergraduate-
students/#:~:text=Approved%20undergraduate%20courses%20must%20be,specified%20in%20the%20Student%20Support)
.

If you are getting a social welfare payment, you may be able to take part in
an access or foundation course and get the [ Back to Education Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-allowance/) .

You should check access programmes with the higher education institution of
your choice or your local [ Education and Training Board.
](http://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/)

##  College entry requirements for mature students

Generally, you will need to have completed your Leaving Certificate to attend
third level education. However, if you are applying for a place as a mature
student, you will not be asked to meet the usual entry requirements.

Different courses have different entry procedures. Usually, colleges will
consider your:

  * Educational background 
  * Work history 
  * Community involvement 
  * Other achievements and interests 

This system is known as the Accreditation of Prior Experiential Learning
(APEL) or [ Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL)
](https://www.qualifax.ie/resources/recognition-of-prior-learning) . Course
providers can use APEL or RPL to let you enter a course or give you exemptions
from parts of a course based on your previous learning and experience.

It is useful to find out whether the college of your choice uses the APEL or
RPL system before you apply.

You can find more information about [ mature student entry requirements for
full-time undergraduate courses ](https://www.qualifax.ie/resources/adult-
learners) on the Qualifax website.

In some cases, you may be asked to take an entrance exam.

##  Fees for mature students

###  **Full-time study**

If you qualify for the [ Free Fees Initiative
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/) , you will not have to pay fees
in a [ publicly-funded college ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5088c-list-
of-publicly-funded-higher-education-institutions/) .

If you qualify for the [ Student Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) ,
you may get all or part of your [ student contribution
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/#ld8ce9) paid. If you’re doing
certain part-time undergraduate courses, you may qualify for a fee
contribution through the [ part-time fee scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-
courses/) .

You can read about [ applying for the student grant as a mature student
](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/applicant-class/information-
for-mature-students/) on the SUSI website.

If you are returning to education and have been getting a social welfare
payment, you may qualify for the [ Back to Education Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-allowance/) or the Student Grant depending on your circumstances.
If you are eligible for both, you should check which you would be better off
applying for.

You can apply for tax relief if you are paying for the course from your own
income, or another person can claim the tax relief if they are paying fees on
your behalf. To qualify for the tax relief on your fees, your course must be
an [ approved course at an approved college
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-level-education/approved-
colleges-and-courses.aspx) .

###  **Part-time, modular and distance education**

You usually have to pay fees for all part-time, modular and distance education
courses. The costs vary from course to course. However, you may apply for [
tax relief ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-
level-fees/) if you are participating on an approved course.

A [ new scheme to provide SUSI funding for the 2024-25 academic year
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-
scheme/#:~:text=Student%20Grant%3F%E2%80%99%20below\).-,Part%2Dtime%20fee%20scheme,-A%20pilot%20scheme)
is available for students on specified part-time undergraduate courses. The
Part-Time Fees Scheme opened for applications on 1 August 2024. Students
should apply via the SUSI website. A [ list of the courses eligible for
2024-2025 ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/approved-
courses/undergraduate-students-approved-institutions---part-time-
courses/#d.en.15195) is available.

##  Applying for college as a mature student

If you are applying for a course in a higher education institution, you should
first contact the college directly about their application requirements.

The Admissions Office or Mature Students Officer will have information about
any specific requirements or extra information you need to provide when
applying for your course.

You will be in competition with other mature students for a place on the
course, so make sure to include as much detail as possible regarding your
educational background, work experience and other interests.

###  **Applying through the CAO as a mature student**

They will tell you if you need to submit an application directly to the
institution or use the [ CAO application process
](https://www.cao.ie/index.php?page=mature) , or both.

If the institution wants you to apply through the CAO and you wish to be
assessed as a mature student, you must register on the CAO system before 1
February of the year you plan to start your course. If you apply before 20
January there is a discounted application fee of €30. The normal fee €45.

Most higher education institutions will not consider your mature student
application if you apply using the ‘Late Application’ or ‘Change of Mind’
facilities on the CAO portal.

The CAO has detailed information on [ applying to college as a mature student
](https://www.cao.ie/index.php?page=mature) .

###  **Applying for university access programmes, part-time courses, tertiary
education programmes or post-leaving certificate courses**

You should contact your chosen university or local Education and Training
Board (ETB) for information about university access programmes and part-time
courses. You can also get information on [ entry routes for mature students
for universities online ](https://www.iua.ie/ourwork/access/mature-students/)
.

The [ tertiary education programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/tertiary-education-programme/) is a new way to
get a degree at third level. Students can enrol in a further education
institution before progressing to a higher education institution to complete
their fully-accredited degree. All courses lead to a degree at Level 7 or 8 on
the [ National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/colleges-and-qualifications/fet-qualifications/#828dc6) . If you are
applying through the tertiary education programme, you can apply directly
through [ the courses page of the National Tertiary Office website
](https://nto.hea.ie/courses/?q=mature) .

If you are applying for a [ post-leaving certificate (PLC)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) , you should contact your local
ETB for information.

###  **Applying to private colleges**

You can apply directly to [ private colleges
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/education/tuition-fees-paid-for-third-level-education/approved-
colleges-and-courses.aspx) for full-time, part-time and post- graduate
courses.

##  More information

You can read more about [ applying as a mature student in the CAO’s
information sheet (pdf)
](https://www2.cao.ie/downloads/documents/2024/infosheets/mature_infosheet_2024.pdf)
.

You can also find [ a list of college website pages
](https://www.cao.ie/index.php?page=mature_list) and [ student support
officers for mature students
](https://www.cao.ie/index.php?page=hei&type=mature) on the CAO website.

###  Central Applications Office

Tower House  
Eglinton Street  
Galway  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Office Hours 9:30-17:00

**Tel:** (091) 509 800

**Fax:** (091) 562 344

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cao.ie ](http://www.cao.ie)

_**Page edited:** 13 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Third-
level%20courses%20and%20mature%20students&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Third-
level%20courses%20and%20mature%20students&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-courses-for-mature-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax relief for third-level fees_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)

Tax relief is available in respect of tuition fees paid in private third-level
institutions, in institutions abroad and by repeat students and part-time
students. The Student Contribution may also qualify for relief.

1864.2297

  * [ _Moving to Ireland for third-level education_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/third-level-education/)

Third level educational system in Ireland and the way in which places at
universities and colleges are allocated.

1805.8186

  * [ _Third-level student fees and charges_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/)

Information on the Free Fees Iniative. Explains who doesn't have to pay third-
level fees.

1774.3274

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

