**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Industrial relations and trade unions
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-
trade-unions/) > Trade unions

#  Trade unions

  * What is a trade union? 
  * Joining a trade union 
  * What is collective bargaining? 
  * Trade union-related rights 
  * The laws on trade unions 
  * More information 

##  What is a trade union?

A trade union is an organisation that represents and protects the rights and
interests of its members. Members are employees in a particular sector or job,
for example, teaching or nursing.

A trade union must have a [ negotiating licence
](https://dbei.gov.ie/en/Publications/Guidelines-and-Application-Form-for-
Trade-Union-Negotiation-Licence.html) to negotiate employee wages and other
conditions of employment.

The [ Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU) ](http://www.ictu.ie/) is the
umbrella organisation for trade unions, representing a range of interests of
ICTU members, both in Ireland and in Northern Ireland. ICTU has information if
you want to [ join a union ](https://ictu.ie/join-union) .

##  Joining a trade union

Trade unions work to protect [ your basic statutory employment rights
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employee-rights-and-entitlements/) ,
as set out by employment legislation.

Joining a trade union can offer several benefits, including:

  * **Collective bargaining** – as part of a trade union, you are part of a larger group with more bargaining power; this can lead to better pay, benefits, and working conditions 
  * **Legal protection** – a trade union can support you with workplace disputes or issues with your employer 
  * **Training and advice** – many trade unions offer training and advice to help you with your employment rights 

###  **Deciding whether to join**

Employees have a right under the [ Constitution
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) to join a trade union. You can join
the union of your choice and can leave a union at any time.

You cannot be discriminated against or dismissed from your job because you are
a member of a union.

###  **How to join**

Check if there is already a union representative in your workplace. There may
be more than one union in your workplace. The union representative will be
able to help you join and act as a first point of contact for union-related
matters.

If you do not know which union to join, you can [ complete an application form
on the ICTU website ](https://ictu.ie/join-union) , and they will help you
select the most appropriate union to represent you.

###  **Cost to join**

There is a regular subscription cost for union membership, which is decided by
the trade union.

It is usually 0.5% to 1% of your _gross salary_ a year. Your gross salary is
your total pay before tax and other deductions.

##  What is collective bargaining?

Collective bargaining is where an employer and a trade union voluntarily
decide to talk and agree on working conditions or terms of employment (or non-
employment) of workers.

There is no legal obligation on an employer to recognise or deal with a trade
union to negotiate pay and work conditions. In practice, many terms and
conditions of employment are negotiated and agreed upon through collective
bargaining.

###  **Resolving disputes**

If parties cannot agree, they can use the Industrial Relations dispute
resolution mechanism operated by the [ Workplace Relations Commission
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/What_You_Should_Know/Industrial_Relations/)
and the [ Labour Court
](http://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/WR_Bodies/Labour_Court/) .

##  Trade union-related rights

You cannot be discriminated against because you are in a union or because of
your union activity.

###  **Unfair dismissal for trade union membership or activity**

If you have been dismissed from your employment for trade union activity or
membership, this is automatically unfair under the [ Unfair Dismissals Acts
1977-2015 ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) .

You can bring your case to the [ Workplace Relations Commission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/adjudication-employment-rights-disputes-and-complaints/) (WRC) using
the online complaint form available on [ workplacerelations.ie
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
. You do not need to have worked for your employer for a certain amount of
time to bring a case.

###  Attending trade union activities

Trade union activity is either agreed with your employer or takes place
outside your work hours.

Check with your employer or union if you can take part in trade union
activities during your normal work hours and if your employer will still pay
you for these hours.

##  The laws on trade unions

The following laws govern trade unions and trade union disputes:

  * [ 1937 Constitution (Bunreacht na hEireann) ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html)
  * [ Trade Union Acts 1871 to 1990 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1871/act/31/enacted/en/print.html)
  * [ Industrial Relations Act 1990 to 2015 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1990/act/19/revised/en/pdf?annotations=false)
  * [ Unfair Dismissals Acts 1977 to 2015 ](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1977_0010.htm)

##  More information

You can read more about what unions do and joining a union on the [ Irish
Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU) website ](http://www.ictu.ie/) .

If you need information about your employment rights, you can contact the WRC.
There is a [ general guide to employment law (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/guide_to_employment_labour_and_equality_law_18.pdf)
on the Workplace Relations website.

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 7 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-
unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Trade%20unions&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-
unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-
unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Trade%20unions&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-
unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Trade disputes and industrial action_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-disputes/)

Outlines the law on trade disputes and industrial action and the protections
for employees.

1694.6516

  * [ _Credit unions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-unions/)

Credit unions are organisations of people that save together and lend to each
other at fair rates of interest.

1496.9933

  * [ _Air passenger rights in the European Union_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-eu/)

Find out about your rights when purchasing tickets, reserving flights and
travelling by air with European airlines.

1158.075

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

