**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Leave and holidays ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/) > Case study: force majeure leave

#  Case study: force majeure leave

  * Introduction 

##  Introduction

Mary got a phone call from her son’s school to say that he was sick and had to
be collected as soon as possible. Mary left work to collect and look after her
son and returned to work the following day. Her employer asked if she wanted
to take annual leave for the previous day. Mary said that she wanted to take
force majeure leave instead as she was urgently needed to care for a close
family member. Mary’s employer agreed but said she would to have apply in
writing for the force majeure leave.

Mary applied in writing for the 1 day force majeure leave. Her application set
out her personal details, her relationship to her child, the date and reason
for the force majeure leave.

Some months later Mary’s father died suddenly and Mary asked if she could have
a day off to go to the funeral. Mary’s employer said that unless she took
annual leave she would lose a day’s pay if she went to the funeral. Mary
thought that she could take force majeure leave for a day as the [ Parental
Leave Acts 1998 - 2019
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0030/index.html) allows a
maximum of 3 days force majeure leave in a 12-month period. Her employer said
that unfortunately force majeure leave is only for the illness of a close
family member. It does not give any entitlement to leave following the death
of a close family member.

_**Page edited:** 10 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Case%20study%3A%20force%20majeure%20leave&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Case%20study%3A%20force%20majeure%20leave&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/case-study-force-majeure-
leave/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Parental leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/)

The Parental Leave Acts 1998-2019 allow parents to take 26 weeks parental
leave from employment, up until their child’s 12th birthday.

1240.0995

  * [ _Case study: Taxation of Maternity Benefit_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-taxation-of-maternity-benefit/)

A case study showing how Maternity Benefit is taxed.

1204.4834

  * [ _Leave for parents_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/leave-for-parents/)

Overview of the different types of statutory leave entitlements available for
working parents.

1152.2386

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

