**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Teachers and schools ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/teachers-and-schools/) > Teacher qualifications

#  Teacher qualifications

  * The regulation of teachers 
  * Teacher education and qualifications 
  * Teachers who qualified outside Ireland 
  * Continuing professional development 
  * Registration of teachers 

##  The regulation of teachers

The [ Teacher Education Section
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/d5f08-initial-teacher-education-and-
professional-development-section/) of the [ Department of Education
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education/) oversees
teacher education policy and practice for [ primary schools
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary_and_post_primary_education/going_to_primary_school/)
and [ post-primary schools
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary_and_post_primary_education/going_to_post_primary_school/)
.

The Teaching Council is the professional standards body for teaching and
regulates the teaching profession in Ireland. The Teaching Council produces a
code of professional conduct for teachers, which covers standards of teaching,
knowledge, skill and competence. It also maintains a register of teachers –
see ‘Registration of teachers’ below.

##  Teacher education and qualifications

###  Primary teachers

Primary school teachers must be qualified to teach the range of [ primary
school subjects ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-
primary-school/primary-school-curriculum/) to children aged 4 to 12 years. You
can find information on the [ qualifications you need to be a primary school
teacher ](http://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/Registration/How-do-I-
register-/Qualifications/Primary-Teachers-Qualified-In-Ireland/Qualification-
Requirements-for-Primary-Teachers-Qualifications-Awarded-in-Ireland-.html) on
the Teaching Council's website.

A [ list of recognised colleges ](http://www.teachingcouncil.ie/teacher-
education/initial-teacher-education-ite.191.html) providing approved
programmes is available on the website of the Teaching Council.

**Irish language requirements:** Primary school teachers must be able to teach
the Irish language and the range of primary school subjects through Irish.

###  Post-primary teachers

Post-primary teachers are normally required to teach at least 1 subject which
they have studied to degree level. Post-primary teachers do not need to have a
qualification in the Irish language unless they are employed by a Gaeltacht
school or a school where Irish is the medium of instruction.

Qualification is usually achieved by gaining a primary degree from a [
recognised third-level institution
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/6f762-employing-a-teacher/) . This degree
must include at least 1 subject from the [ post-primary schools’ curriculum
](https://www.curriculumonline.ie/Senior-cycle/Curriculum/) for the Leaving
Certificate Programme. The Teaching Council is the professional standards body
for teaching. The Council promotes and regulates the profession. The primary
degree is followed by a postgraduate qualification in education such as the
Professional Masters in Education (PME).

###  Recognition of qualifications

The [ Teaching Council ](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/) is the statutory
body that sets the standards of academic achievement and professional training
required of teachers.

###  Student teachers

[ Student teachers ](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/news-events/latest-
news/2023/teachers-who-qualified-abroad-can-apply-for-registration-and-
complete-their-induction-in-ireland-on-a-time-bound-basis.html) who have
successfully completed the first 2 years of an accredited undergraduate
Initial Teacher Education programme can apply for registration with the
Teaching Council.

##  Teachers who qualified outside Ireland

###  Recognition of qualifications  

If you are a primary or post-primary school teacher who qualified outside
Ireland and you wish to teach in a recognised school, you must apply for
recognition of your qualifications prior to registration. The [ Teaching
Council processes applications ](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/) and
regulates admissions to the teaching profession in Ireland.

Qualifications obtained outside the Ireland must be acceptable to the Council.
Once your qualifications have been recognised, you may then apply for
registration. The Teaching Council provides more [ information for teachers
who qualified abroad ](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/news-events/latest-
news/2023/teachers-who-qualified-abroad-can-apply-for-registration-and-
complete-their-induction-in-ireland-on-a-time-bound-basis.html) .

###  **Teachers who qualified in Ukraine**

If you qualified as a teacher in Ukraine and have been granted [ EU Temporary
Protection ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-
process-in-ireland/temporary-protection-directive/) , you can apply to work as
a teacher in Ireland under The Teaching Council’s tailored [ registration
process for teachers from Ukraine
](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/register/qualified-outside-of-
ireland/registration-process-for-qualified-ukrainian-teachers/) .

###  Foreign language assistants scheme  

This scheme allows for language assistants from France, Germany, Spain,
Austria, Italy and Belgium/Wallonia-Brussels to be assigned to post-primary
schools and colleges in Ireland. Their fluency can help students understand
and speak a foreign language and give them a better understanding of the way
of life and customs of other countries. In the same way Irish students of
French, German, Italian and Spanish can apply to work as English language
assistants in the countries listed above. You can find details of the [
English Language Assistant scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/a960dd-
english-language-assistant-scheme/) on gov.ie.

##  Continuing professional development

There are a number of supports available to teachers for [ continuing
professional development ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/25737e-professional-
development/) . The Department of Education provides support to school leaders
and teachers in a number of areas such as curriculum reform, improving
principals’ skills as leaders and managers, facilitating the management of
schools and increasing the involvement of parents in the education of their
children.

It also provides support to particular projects and initiatives including
priority areas of education provision such as [ disadvantage and inclusion
](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/measures-to-address-educational-
disadvantage/) , [ education for students with special educational needs,
](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-education/) [ positive
behaviour management ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-discipline/) and
language support for [ foreign national students ](/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/educational-supports/resources-for-non-english-
speakers/) .

###  Education centres

The nationwide [ network of education centres ](https://esci.ie/education-
centres.html) organise the local delivery of national programmes of teacher
professional development on behalf of the Department of Education. The centres
also organise a varied local programme of activities for teachers, school
management and parents in response to demand.

###  Professional Development Service for Teachers

[ Professional Development Service for Teachers (PDST) ](https://www.pdst.ie/)
provides professional development and support to help teachers and schools to
provide the best possible education for all pupils and students. Continuing
Professional Development opportunities are provided for teachers nationwide
and in collaboration with the Education Centre network.

###  Training for special educational needs

The [ Special Education Support Service ](http://www.sess.ie) co-ordinates,
develops and delivers a range of professional development initiatives and
support structures for school personnel working with students with special
educational needs in a variety of educational settings. These include
mainstream primary and post-primary schools, special schools and special
classes attached to mainstream schools.  

##  Registration of teachers

Teachers employed in State-funded teaching positions in recognised schools
must be registered with the [ Teaching Council
](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/en/) in order to be paid from public funds.

[ Garda vetting ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-
protection-at-work/garda-vetting/) and a character reference is required to
register. The Teaching Council provides [ details of registration for teachers
](http://www.teachingcouncil.ie/registration/applying-to-register.195.html) .  

  

_**Page edited:** 27 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/teacher-
qualifications/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Teacher%20qualifications&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/teacher-
qualifications/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/teacher-
qualifications/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Teacher%20qualifications&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/teachers-and-schools/teacher-
qualifications/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Recognition of professional qualifications in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-ireland/)

Outlines how professional qualifications are regulated in Ireland and in the
EU including the following professions: electrician, teacher, architect,
doctor, accountant and more

1394.6072

  * [ _Further and higher education qualifications_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/colleges-and-qualifications/fet-qualifications/)

The system of validation of qualifications in further and higher education.

1285.715

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1084.2609

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

