**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Employment support schemes ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/) > Pathways to work - schemes and
initiatives

#  Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives

  * Employment and training supports 
  * Supports to start your own business 
  * Schemes for work experience and training 
  * Schemes to help you get a job 

##  Employment and training supports

If you have been unemployed for a long time, there are many employment and
training schemes to help you return to work.

The schemes are aimed at people on certain social welfare payments for a
specific period.

Each scheme has its own eligibility criteria, so it is important to check the
detailed information about each one.

Some schemes fund community and voluntary organisations to provide employment
opportunities to benefit the local community.

###  Impact on your social welfare payment

Participating in one of these schemes may affect you in different ways. This
depends on the scheme.

Some of these schemes are available to [ people on certain disability payments
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-work/) .
There are additional [ employment supports for people with disabilities.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/)

###  Childcare arrangements

If you take up a place on a Department of Social Protection employment
programme, you may be eligible for the [ National Childcare Scheme (NCS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/) . The NCS provides financial support to
help parents meet childcare costs.

##  Supports to start your own business

If you are getting certain social welfare payments and you want to become
self-employed, you may be eligible for the Back to Work Enterprise Allowance
or the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance.

###  **Back to Work Enterprise Allowance**

The [ Back to Work Enterprise Allowance (BTWEA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-and-work/back-to-work-enterprise-allowance/)
scheme helps [ unemployed people
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/) and others getting certain social welfare
payments, become self-employed.

If you are setting up your own business and qualify for the BTWEA scheme, you
can keep a percentage of your social welfare payment for up to 2 years.

###  **Short-Term Enterprise Allowance**

The [ Short-Term Enterprise Allowance (STEA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-and-work/short-term-enterprise-allowance/)
supports people who have lost their jobs and want to start their own
businesses.

To qualify, you must be getting a Jobseeker’s Benefit. There is no qualifying
period to get STEA. However, if you are working part-time while getting
Jobseeker’s Benefit, you won’t be eligible for this support.

The Short-Term Enterprise Allowance replaces your Jobseeker’s Benefit. It ends
when your entitlement to Jobseeker's Benefit ends (at either 9 or 6 months).

##  Schemes for work experience and training

If you have never had a job or want to improve your work experience and
training, you may be eligible for the following:

###  **Work Placement Experience Programme (WPEP)**

The [ WPEP ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/work-placement-experience-
programme/) gives people who have never had a job and those who have lost
their jobs a chance to get work experience through placements in host
organisations.

You must be aged 18 to 65, unemployed for at least 6 months, and currently
getting a qualifying social welfare payment.

###  **Community Employment (CE)**

The [ Community Employment (CE) programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/) provides
training and work experience through part-time and temporary placements in
jobs within local communities.

Eligibility for CE depends on your age and personal situation.

###  **Tús**

The [ Tús scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/tus/) is a community work placement
initiative providing work opportunities which benefit the community. These
opportunities are provided by community and voluntary organisations in urban
and rural areas.

Eligible participants are selected and contacted by the Department of Social
Protection.

###  **Returning to full-time or part-time education**

Various [ schemes and supports ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/back-to-education/back-to-education-
allowance/) are available for people on social welfare who want to return to
full-time or part-time education.

##  Schemes to help you get a job

There are several other schemes to help people gain employment including:

###  **Part-time Job Incentive**

The [ Part-time Job Incentive (PTJI) Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-scheme/) is
for people getting Jobseeker’s Allowance for 15 months or more. It allows them
to take up part-time work and get a Part-time Job Allowance instead of the
Jobseeker’s Allowance.

###  **JobsPlus**

[ JobsPlus ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/jobsplus/) is an employer incentive
encouraging and rewarding employers who employ jobseekers on the Live
Register.

Eligible employers who employ full-time employees can apply for this
incentive.

###  **Community Services Programme**

The [ Community Services Programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-services-programme/) supports
community businesses to provide essential local services and create employment
opportunities for unemployed people and people with disabilities.

###  **Rural Social Scheme**

The [ Rural Social Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/farming-and-fishing/rural-social-scheme/) is
aimed at low-income farmers and fisher people. To qualify, you must be getting
a social welfare payment. In return, people participating in RSS provide
services that benefit rural communities.

_**Page edited:** 16 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-
employment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Pathways%20to%20work%20-%20schemes%20and%20initiatives&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-
employment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-
employment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Pathways%20to%20work%20-%20schemes%20and%20initiatives&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-
employment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Housing and other supports for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)

Housing and other supports for homeless people.

1320.7684

  * [ _Voluntary work and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-payments/)

If you want to keep your social welfare payment and do some voluntary work,
you must follow the rules set down by the Department of Social Protection.

1054.3348

  * [ _Farming grants and schemes_ ](/en/environment/land/farming-grants-and-schemes/)

An overview of the main grants and schemes available to farmers.

1046.9723

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

