**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Contracts of employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/) > Changes to your employment contract

#  Changes to your employment contract

  * Can my contract be changed? 
  * Responding to proposed changes to your contract 
  * Changes to work practices 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Legislation covering contract changes 

##  Can my contract be changed?

All employees in Ireland must get a _written statement_ of their terms of
employment, including their pay and hours of work. You can usually find this
in your [ contract of employment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) .

There are 2 main ways your contract can change:

  * Due to a change in the law, or 
  * By agreement between you and your employer 

Your employer cannot change your contract without your agreement.

###  **Changes introduced by law**

You and your employer must comply with the law. For example, in 2023, the law
extended an employee’s legal entitlement to sick leave.

###  **Changes introduced by agreement**

You and your employer can agree to change your contract, for example if your
job responsibilities change.

Your employer must give you the details of the change(s) **in writing, by or
before the day on which the change takes effect** .

If you are going to work outside Ireland and the change will take place while
you are away or on your return, you must get written notification before you
leave.

##  Responding to proposed changes to your contract

If your employer wants to make a significant change to your contract you
should:

  1. Request written details of the proposed change 
  2. Ask for a review date when the change can be reconsidered 
  3. Respond in writing to say whether you agree or disagree with the change 

If you agree with the change, you should tell your employer your acceptance is
temporary. At the review date, you can ask to return to your original terms
and conditions.

###  **If you disagree**

If you disagree with your employer’s proposed change to your contract, and
want to continue working on your current terms, your employer may decide to
make you [ redundant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/what-is-redundancy/) .

Your employer must prove there is a genuine need for redundancy and that they
have followed fair procedures. Otherwise, you may be able to claim for [
unfair dismissal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/) .

If your employer insists on [ cutting your hours or pay
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/being-asked-to-take-a-cut-in-pay-or-hours/)
, you may decide you have no choice but to leave your job. This is called [
constructive dismissal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/constructive-dismissal/) , where the decision to leave is
yours but the employer’s actions have forced you to resign.

Proving constructive dismissal can be difficult, so you should get
professional legal advice. Community Law and Mediation (CLM) offers [ free
legal information, advice and mediation services
](https://communitylawandmediation.ie/services/) .

###  **Your contract was changed without telling you**

If your employer changes your terms of employment without telling you, speak
with your employer directly. You can also raise the issue with the HR section,
if you have one.

If you are a member of a [ trade union
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-unions/) , your local
representative can provide guidance and support.

If you still don’t get written notification of the changes, and you cannot
resolve the issue with your employer, you can complain to the Workplace
Relations Commission (WRC) – see 'How to make a complaint' below.

##  Changes to work practices

Your employer cannot change your contract without your agreement, but they can
change your work practices.

Legally, there is a difference between contractual terms and work practices.

**Contractual terms**

_Contractual terms_ include your pay, hours of work, sick pay and pension
scheme.

Many of your contractual terms are in the written statement of your [ terms
and conditions of employment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/) . You may find
other contractual terms in your:

  * Staff handbook 
  * Pension scheme booklet 
  * Collective agreement with your employer 

**Work practices**

Examples of _work practices_ include breaks and rostering. You can find
details of these practices in your staff handbook.

Your employer may change these work practices **without your agreement** . It
is reasonable for an employer to update work practices or processes to save
money or increase efficiency.

##  How to make a complaint

If you have a complaint about a change to your contract, you should speak to
your employer. Try to follow the grievance procedure set out in your employee
handbook.

###  Taking your complaint further

If you cannot resolve the problem with your employer, you can complain to the
[ Workplace Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/workplace-relations-commission/) using their [ online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/e-complaint_form/) .

You should make your complaint within 6 months of the dispute or complaint
taking place. This time limit can be extended for a further 6 months, but only
if you have a reasonable cause for not bringing the complaint within the
normal time limit.

##  Legislation covering contract changes

The law on changing your contract is set out in [ Section 5
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0005/sec0005.html#zza5y1994s5)
of the Terms of Employment (Information) Acts 1994–2014. The rules were
updated by the [ European Union (Transparent and Predictable Working
Conditions) Regulations 2022
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/si/686/made/en/print) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 28 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/change-job-
contract/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Changes%20to%20your%20employment%20contract&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/change-job-
contract/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/change-job-
contract/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Changes%20to%20your%20employment%20contract&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/change-job-
contract/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rent Supplement and changes to your circumstances_ ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/changes-to-rent-supplement/)

If your circumstances change while you are getting Rent Supplement you may
have your payment reduced or you may no longer be eligible for it. This
document outlines what happens to your Rent Supplement payment in some common
situations.

1485.387

  * [ _Contract of employment_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/)

The law specifies that contracts of employment must contain certain details,
and your employer must give you your terms of employment in writing.

1157.7283

  * [ _Changes that can affect your social welfare payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/)

A change in your circumstances can affect your entitlement to a social welfare
payment. This document gives some examples of the changes that can affect your
social welfare payment.

1120.5372

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

