**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Enforcement and redress ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/) > Workplace
mediation

#  Workplace mediation

  * What is workplace mediation? 
  * Why use mediation? 
  * Principles of mediation 
  * Mediation services available 
  * How to apply for mediation 
  * What happens during mediation? 
  * Mediation outcomes 
  * More information 

##  What is workplace mediation?

Workplace mediation is a voluntary process that aims to resolve workplace
disputes and disagreements, particularly between individuals or small groups.

The [ Workplace Relations Commission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/workplace-relations-commission/) provides a [ Mediation Service
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what-we-
do/industrial%20relations/mediation_services/) . It is a confidential service
that gives employees and employers in dispute, a chance to work with a
mediator to find a mutually agreed solution to the problem.

A mediator is a trained professional who will not make any decisions, but help
both parties understand each other.

Workplace mediation is voluntary and both sides must agree to participate and
to work towards a solution to the problem.

If no agreed solution is reached, other ways of resolving the issues have to
be used, such as [ formal adjudication
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what-we-do/employment-rights-
information/adjudication_services/) .

##  Why use mediation?

Workplace mediation allows a problem to be resolved informally, by making sure
that all the sides are heard.

Generally, reaching an agreement through mediation is quicker, cheaper, and
less stressful for everyone involved than formal adjudication or other third-
party processes.

As both parties work together to solve the problem, the resolution is in their
control. Where both you and your employer are committed to a mutually agreed
solution it is likely to be more effective and last longer.

The agreement reached through mediation is legally binding. This means it can
be enforced through the courts.

Mediation is used before the issue is referred for formal adjudication or
other third-party processes.

##  Principles of mediation

The Mediation Service works on the following principles:

  * It is a voluntary process; all parties must agree to participate. 
  * Either party can withdraw from the process at any stage. 
  * The process is confidential unless the parties agree otherwise. 
  * It is fast and starts as soon as everyone is available. 
  * The mediator is impartial. 
  * Its focus is to find a solution to the dispute which is agreeable to all parties and which will work. 

The process aims to allow each person involved in the dispute the chance to be
heard and to work with the other party to reach a solution.

It is a flexible process that can include joint meetings or meetings with the
mediator alone, depending on the situation.

##  Mediation services available

The Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) provides the following mediation
services:

  * Mediation in employment rights or unequal treatment and discrimination claims 
  * Mediation or facilitation of internal workplace issues 

###  **Employment rights, unequal treatment and discrimination claims**

You can use the mediation service if you feel your employment rights have been
violated. The option of using the mediation service is available to you on the
[ WRC online complaint form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/complaints_disputes/refer_a_dispute_make_a_complaint/)
. Both parties can arrive at a solution through agreement rather than through
an investigation or hearing or formal decision.

In certain cases, you may be offered the Early Resolution Service (ERS) which
is part of the Mediation Service. If both parties are agreeable, a
representative from the ERS contacts them by phone to resolve the dispute
through mediation.

Members of the public can also use mediation to get help with cases related to
unequal treatment or discrimination in public services.

###  **Internal workplace issues**

If you are experiencing an internal workplace issue, mediation is available to
help fix workplace conflicts informally.

The type of situations that are dealt with by the Mediation Service include:

  * Personal differences or people having problems working together 
  * Breakdown of working relationships 
  * Issues arising from a grievance and disciplinary procedure 
  * Industrial relations issues that have not been referred through statutory dispute resolution processes 

##  How to apply for mediation

Ideally, you apply for mediation together with the other party. The process
works best when all parties have agreed that mediation is the best way to
resolve the problem.

You can request the assistance of the Workplace Mediation Services in the
following ways:

  * Fill in the online [ mediation referral form ](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Contact_Us/Mediation_Referral_Form/)
  * Email [ mediation@workplacerelations.ie ](mailto:mediation@workplacerelations.ie)
  * Write to the Conciliation, Advisory and Mediation Services, Workplace Relations Commission, Lansdowne House, Lansdowne Road, Dublin 4, D04 A3A8 

##  What happens during mediation?

The WRC decides on the best approach to be taken – telephone mediation or
face-to-face mediation.

###  **Telephone mediation**

The WRC can decide if the issue is suitable for telephone mediation.

The mediator contacts the employer to see if they are willing to engage. If
they agree, the mediator consults with the parties separately by telephone or
email to try and help them reach a resolution.

Conversations are confidential and the parties decide what the mediator can
and cannot share with the other side.

###  **In-person mediation**

Sometimes talks about a complaint are more suited to a face-to-face process.

The WRC provides in-person mediation in:

  * Equality cases 
  * More complex employment rights cases like [ unfair dismissal ](https://www.google.com/url?client=internal-element-cse&cx=006414847141085406041:ntchszasfve&q=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/&sa=U&ved=2ahUKEwjMibrYn_CAAxV7VEEAHbi6Ar0QFnoECAIQAg&usg=AOvVaw1h4z2Q82FYUwe8TjRuvG6U)
  * Cases where the parties agree in-person meetings are more appropriate 

Face-to-face mediation involves a series of meetings that take place on the
same day.

The mediator talks separately with each party. This allows the mediator to:

  * Discuss the issues confidentially with each side 
  * Explore possible solutions without prejudice to anybody’s position. This means without negatively affecting either side 

The mediator may later invite the parties to meet, for a discussion
facilitated by the mediator.

All information shared in both separate and joint talks is confidential and
will not be shared with the other party unless this is agreed.

##  Mediation outcomes

###  **You reach agreement**

If you reach an agreement, the mediator writes up the terms of a draft
agreement. Once both parties are happy with the draft, a final version is
given to each side to sign.

The final agreement is legally binding and confidential.

###  **You don’t reach an agreement**

If no agreed solution is reached, other ways of resolving the issues have to
be used. The mediator can help the participants decide how best to proceed.
You can read more about [ employment rights enforcement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/enforcing-your-employment-rights/) .

##  More information

You can get detailed information about workplace mediation and what the
process involves in the WRC [ Pre-Adjudication Mediation FAQs (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/wrc-pre-
adjudication-mediation-frequently-asked-questions.pdf) .

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Conciliation and Mediation Services

Lansdowne House  
Lansdowne Road  
Dublin 4  
D04 A3A8

**Tel:** (01) 613 6700

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Fax:** (01) 613 6701

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 31 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-
and-redress/workplace-mediation/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Workplace%20mediation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-
and-redress/workplace-mediation/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-
and-redress/workplace-mediation/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Workplace%20mediation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-
and-redress/workplace-mediation/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Equality in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/equality-in-the-workplace/)

Employment equality legisation makes discrimination illegal in certain
employment-related areas.

1484.0437

  * [ _Smoking in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-workplace/)

It is an offence to smoke in an enclosed place of work. Find out more about
the smoking ban and how it is enforced.

1371.3867

  * [ _Accidents in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-workplace/)

Find out what you should do if you have an accident while at work or on your
way to work.

1349.8928

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

