**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Pre-school education and childcare ](/en/education/pre-school-education-
and-childcare/) > Universal childcare subsidy

#  Universal childcare subsidy

  * What is the universal subsidy? 
  * How to qualify for the universal subsidy 
  * What is the rate of the universal subsidy? 
  * How to apply for the universal subsidy 
  * More information 

##  What is the universal subsidy?

The universal subsidy is a childcare subsidy for children over 6 months and
under 15 years who are in Tusla-registered childcare.

The subsidy is paid directly to your childcare provider. The subsidy is then
deducted from the overall bill you get from your childcare provider.

##  How to qualify for the universal subsidy

To qualify for the universal subsidy:

  * Your child must be over 6 months (24 weeks) and under 15 years of age 
  * Your childcare provider must be [ registered with Tusla ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/preschool-services/early-years-providers/register-of-early-years-services-by-county/) and in a contract with the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY) to offer the universal subsidy 

The subsidy is not means-tested.

You cannot get the [ universal subsidy and an income-assessed subsidy
](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/national-childcare-scheme/)
at the same time. However, you can choose which subsidy is of greatest benefit
to you.

##  What is the rate of the universal subsidy?

The rate of the universal childcare subsidy is €2.14 an hour up to a maximum
of 45 hours a week to all eligible children.

####  For example

If your child is attending childcare for 45 hours a week, the subsidy you
could get is €96.30 per week (€2.14 x 45 hours).

If your child is attending childcare for 20 hours a week, you could get a
subsidy of €42.80 per week (€2.14 x 20 hours).

You can use the [ subsidy calculator ](https://www.ncs.gov.ie/en/childcare-
subsidy-calculator-input/) on the NCS website to help work out what your
entitlement will be.

##  How to apply for the universal subsidy

You can apply for the universal subsidy [ on the NCS website
](https://ncs.gov.ie/en/) .

You will need:

  * A [ verified MyGovID ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/egovernment/mygovid/) account 
  * The date of birth and [ Personal Public Service (PPS) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) number for each child you are applying for 

Read more about [ applying for the NCS online
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/#16f160) .

You can apply by post by contacting the Parent Support Centre (see ‘More
information’ below). If you apply by post, it takes longer to process and may
affect the start date when your subsidy can be paid.

The subsidy is paid directly to your childcare provider and is deducted from
the cost of your childcare.

##  More information

Read more about the [ National Childcare Scheme (NCS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/) .

You can get a list of contracted childcare providers from the [ NCS website
](https://www.ncs.gov.ie/en/childcare-search/) or contact your [ City or
County Childcare Committee ](https://myccc.ie/) .

You can call the National Childcare Scheme Parent Support Centre on (01) 906
8530 (9am – 5pm, Monday to Friday).

_**Page edited:** 4 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/universal-childcare-
subsidy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Universal%20childcare%20subsidy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/universal-childcare-
subsidy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/universal-childcare-
subsidy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Universal%20childcare%20subsidy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/universal-childcare-
subsidy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of school age childcare services_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-childcare/)

School age childcare providers are regulated by law. Find out about the rules
that apply to childcare services providing care to school age children.

1239.6093

  * [ _National Childcare Scheme (NCS)_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/national-childcare-scheme/)

The National Childcare Scheme (NCS) is a new scheme that provides financial
support to help parents to meet the costs of childcare.

1203.3943

  * [ _Regulation of pre-school childcare services_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-childcare-services/)

Pre-school childcare providers are regulated by law. Find out about the rules
concerning play groups, day nurseries,crèches, childminders and other service
providers.

1203.0725

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

