**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Unemployment and redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/) > [
Redundancy ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/) > Being
selected for redundancy

#  Being selected for redundancy

  * Being selected for redundancy 
  * Methods of selection 
  * Unfair selection 
  * If you are unfairly selected for redundancy 
  * More information 

##  Being selected for redundancy

Your employer should use a fair and objective way of selecting people to make
redundant.

This means that it should be based on some objective (unbiased and factual)
reasons why you were selected and other employees were not selected.

##  Methods of selection

If a method for deciding redundancies has been agreed with a trade union, your
employer should follow it.

It is up to your employer which selection criteria they use, as long as they
can show that they are fair and reasonable.

The most commonly used selection methods are:

  * The ‘last in, first out’ method, where the newest member of staff is the first one to go 
  * Asking if employees want to volunteer for redundancy, known as _voluntary redundancy_
  * A points system, where all employees doing the same job are ranked by objective criteria (could include attendance record, standard of work, skills and qualifications). 

##  Unfair selection

Your employer cannot select you for redundancy unless they can prove they
followed a fair process.

Your employer cannot select you for redundancy for personal or non-job-related
reasons.

They must be able to show the objective reasons (unbiased and factual reasons)
why you were selected and other employees were not selected.

###  Grounds that are always unfair

Under the unfair dismissals legislation, it is unfair if you are selected for
redundancy based on certain specific grounds, including:

  * Trade union activity 
  * Pregnancy 
  * Religious 
  * Political opinions 

Your employer cannot make you redundant using any of the [ 9 grounds for
discrimination ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/equality-in-the-workplace/) ,
including your age, gender, race or sexual orientation.

##  If you are unfairly selected for redundancy

Your employer should use fair and reasonable selection criteria in choosing
people to make redundant – see above.

###  You are unfairly selected

If you feel that your employer has selected you unfairly, you are entitled to
bring a claim for unfair dismissal.

###  Your employer does not follow their process

Examples of these situations might include:

  * Where the custom and practice in your workplace has been last in, first out and your selection did not follow this procedure 
  * Where your contract of employment sets out criteria for selection which were not followed 

##  More information

You can get more information about your employment rights from the WRC. You
can contact their Information and Customer service – see below.

The laws on redundancy are set out in the [ Redundancy Payments Acts 1967–2014
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1967_0021.htm)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 2 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Being%20selected%20for%20redundancy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Being%20selected%20for%20redundancy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Lay-off, short-time working and redundancy_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/lay-off-short-time-working-and-redundancy/)

If your employer has no work available for you, or less work available than
usual, you may be put on a lay off or short time working arrangement.

746.737

  * [ _Worksheet on calculating your redundancy payment_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/worksheet-on-calculating-your-redundancy-payment/)

Your redundancy lump sum is calculated according a certain formula based on
your years of service in an employment. This worksheet is to help you work it
out for yourself.

729.31433

  * [ _Alternatives to redundancy_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/alternatives-to-redundancy/)

Before your employer makes you redundant, they might offer you another job in
the business. This is known as ‘alternative work’.

681.84106

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

