**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Pay and employment ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/) > Regularly getting paid late

#  Regularly getting paid late

  * Your legal rights 
  * Talk to your employer to resolve the problem 
  * Take your complaint further 
  * Next steps 
  * Where to complain 

##  Your legal rights

Under your contract of employment, you have a legal right to be paid on time.
If your employer is regularly late paying your wages you can take steps to
enforce your legal right to be paid on time.

First, you should try to resolve this dispute with your employer, by using any
internal complaint or grievances procedures available. If this does not work
and your employer is still paying you late, you can make a formal complaint to
the [ Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-
redress/workplace-relations-commission/) .

At both stages, you should use any supports available, such as a trade union
or your local Citizens Information Centre.

##  Talk to your employer to resolve the problem

You should start by asking your employer to pay you on time and to pay any
wages you are overdue. Your [ written terms of employment
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/contract-of-employment/) should state how often you are supposed to
be paid (for example, weekly or monthly).

###  Make a formal complaint

If there is a complaint or grievance procedure at your workplace you should
use this. Your employer should have written grievance and disciplinary
procedures in place under the WRCâ€™s [ Code of Practice: Grievance and
Disciplinary Procedures
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/what_you_should_know/codes_practice/cop3/)
. You should have got a copy of these at the start of your employment.

If you cannot resolve the problem by following your workplace grievance
procedure, or if your employer does not have one, you may have to take your
complaint further.

##  Take your complaint further

The WRC can adjudicate on disputes, grievances and claims made by individuals
or small groups of workers under a range of employment legislation.

You can make a complaint under either the Industrial Relations Acts 1969-2015
or the Terms of Employment Acts 1994 and 2014. In either case, you start by
applying to the Workplace Relations Commission, using the [ online complaint
form
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/Complaints_Disputes/Refer_a_Dispute_Make_a_Complaint/)
.

You must make the complaint while you are still employed by the employer who
is paying you late or within 6 months of leaving that employment.

##  Next steps

If you bring a case to the WRC, the adjudicators may hold a hearing to
investigate it. If your employer objects to a hearing, you should go to the
Labour Court.

Following their investigation, the adjudicators will make a decision. Either
you or your employer can appeal this decision to the Labour Court.

If you are consistently paid late by your employer, you have the option to
resign and claim [ constructive dismissal ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/constructive-dismissal/) because your employer has
breached the terms of your contract. Before you do this, you should always get
legal advice because proving constructive dismissal can be difficult.  

##  Where to complain

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 1 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/regularly-getting-paid-
late/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Regularly%20getting%20paid%20late&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/regularly-getting-paid-
late/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/regularly-getting-paid-
late/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Regularly%20getting%20paid%20late&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/regularly-getting-paid-
late/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Problems getting your redundancy pay_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/redundancy/problems-getting-redundancy-pay/)

Your employer should pay the redundancy lump sum to you when your employment
ends. Get advice if you are having problems getting your redundancy pay.

1476.1698

  * [ _If your landlord wants you to leave_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/if-your-landlord-wants-you-to-leave/)

The rules that private landlords and approved housing bodies must comply with
when ending a residential tenancy.

1376.4032

  * [ _Paying your electricity bills_ ](/en/consumer/utilities/paying-electricity-bill/)

Help with understanding your electricity bill and advice if you are worried
about paying your bill.

1333.1333

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

