**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Pre-school education and childcare ](/en/education/pre-school-education-
and-childcare/) > Regulation of school age childcare services

#  Regulation of school age childcare services

  * School age childcare 
  * Registration of school age childcare services 
  * School Age Childcare Regulations and inspections 
  * Further information 

##  School age childcare

School age childcare services provide childcare outside of school hours to
children in school and under the age of 15. It includes early years services,
day nursery, crèche and day-care.

Childcare services for school age children must:

  * Register with the Child and Family Agency (Tusla) before providing any services 
  * Comply with the standards of health, safety and welfare set out in the [ Child Care Act 1991 (Early Years Services) (Registration of School Age Services) Regulations 2018 (pdf) ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/si/575/made/en/pdf)

Tusla – the Child and Family agency - is responsible for the inspection and
registration of all childcare services including pre-school and school age
children.

Parents can check the [ register of school age childcare services
](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/03_March_End_External_Register_-
_School_Age.pdf) .

##  Registration of school age childcare services

School age childcare providers must be registered with Tusla. If a provider
offers services for school-age and pre-school children, they must be
registered to provide each service.

Any new service must register with Tusla 3 months before opening the school
age service. You can check the [ register of school age childcare services
(pdf) ](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/03_March_End_External_Register_-
_School_Age.pdf) .

###  Who must register with Tusla and comply with the Regulations?

Childcare providers covered by the Regulations who must register are:

  * Centre-based childcare services 
  * Childminding services 

###  Who does not have to register with Tusla?

Childcare providers exempt from the Regulations include:

  * A relative of the child or the spouse of such a relative (that is, the brother, sister, aunt, uncle, grandparent or step-parent of the child) 
  * A childminder caring for not more than 6 children (other than their own) at the same time. Not more than 3 of the children can be of pre-school age 
  * Childcare services in drop-in centres. These are centres that provide occasional care to children 
  * Temporary school-age childcare services 

###  Re-registration

All services must re-register with Tusla every 3 years, during that time they
will be inspected by Tusla.

###  **Registration certificate**

From 31 January 2023, all childcare services must display a certificate of
registration in a prominent position in their childcare setting.

##  School Age Childcare Regulations and inspections

The [ Regulations for childcare providers
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/si/575/made/en/print) cover a
number of areas.

**Health, welfare and development of the child**

Childcare providers must safeguard the health, safety and welfare of children
attending their service. The [ Regulations (pdf)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/si/575/made/en/pdf) set down the
standards that must be in place before childcare services can be provided to
children. Some of the areas covered by the Regulations include:

**Management and staffing**  
Childcare services must ensure that children are appropriately supervised at
all times.

All staff, students and volunteers who have access to a child must be [ Garda
vetted ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-
work/garda-vetting/) . Childminders (other than those exempted from
registration – see above) must also be Garda vetted

All registered childcare services must have another person available at all
times to assist in case of emergency.

**Ratios of early years children allowed in centre-based services**  
Centre-based services must ensure there is a minimum ratio of 1 adult to 12
school age children at all times.

**Ratios of early years children allowed in childminding services**  
There is a limit on the maximum number of children who can attend a
childminding service at the same time.

Childminding services caring for both pre-school and school age children, must
adhere to strict ratios that apply to children who are in care **at the same
time** .

**Number of children that may be cared for in a childminding service**  
---  
**Number of pre-school children being cared for** |  **Maximum number of school age children**  
0  |  12   
1  |  10   
2  |  7   
3  |  5   
4  |  2   
5  |  1   
  
**Behaviour management**  
The provider should have written policies and procedures to manage challenging
behaviour and bullying.

**Premises  
** Childcare services (including childminders) must ensure their premises meet
certain standards. Children must have access to outdoor space on a daily
basis, either on the premises or an alternative outdoor space.

**Information for parents**  
You should be given information about the service including details of the
person in charge and other staff, the adult/child ratios, the age range of the
children, the type of care, facilities, opening hours and fees.

**Safety measures**  
Registered providers must have policies on the administration of medication,
infection control, fire safety and dropping off and collection of children.

**Insurance**  
Childcare providers must have adequate insurance cover in place for children
in their care.

**Complaints**  
Registered services must have a complaints policy for recording and dealing
with complaints about the service. Parents must be made aware of the policy.

##  Further information

If you need [ further information about the standards and regulation of
childcare services for children (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/88025/5e6c734d-7d21-47f2-ae28-b84b581939d9.pdf) in
your area, you should contact the [ early years inspector
](http://www.tusla.ie/get-in-touch/early-years-inspectors/) .

If you need information on local childcare services and other issues relating
to the care of young children you should contact your [ local City/County
Childcare Committee (CCC) ](https://myccc.ie/)

The [ register of school age childcare service (pdf)
](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/External_Register_School_Age_0811.pdf)
gives you information including the name of the provider, the age profile of
the children and number of children the service can accommodate.

School age service providers can find more information about [ registering and
re-registering a school age service ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/family-
community-support/school-age-services/re-registration-of-school-age-services/)
.

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth
(DCEDIY) has also published an [ action plan on school age childcare
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/89f0b1-action-plan-on-school-age-
childcare/) .

###  Tusla - Child and Family Agency

Brunel Building  
Heuston South Quarter  
Dublin 8  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 771 8500

**Homepage:** [ https://www.tusla.ie/ ](https://www.tusla.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@tusla.ie ](mailto:info@tusla.ie)

_**Page edited:** 16 November 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-
childcare/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Regulation%20of%20school%20age%20childcare%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-
childcare/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-
childcare/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Regulation%20of%20school%20age%20childcare%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-
childcare/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of pre-school childcare services_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-childcare-services/)

Pre-school childcare providers are regulated by law. Find out about the rules
concerning play groups, day nurseries,crèches, childminders and other service
providers.

2932.6028

  * [ _Regulation of estate agents, auctioneers and management agents_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/regulation-of-property-services/)

The Property Services Regulatory Authority (PSRA) is responsible for licensing
and regulating property services providers in Ireland. This document described
their licencing and other functions

1989.7423

  * [ _Agencies providing services for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/)

Organisations providing services to people who find themselves without a home.

1677.0715

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

