**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Starting work and changing job ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/) > [ Training and looking for work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-
changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/) > Learn new skills or retrain

#  Learn new skills or retrain

  * Introduction 
  * Higher education courses 
  * Adult education and community education courses 
  * Training and work experience 
  * Financial supports for training or education 
  * Other agencies and information supports 

##  Introduction

If you are about to lose your job or are unemployed you can upskill or
retrain. You can do this through the formal school and college system or
outside of it.

The Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and
Science has an online portal called the [ right course.
](http://www.gov.ie/therightcourse)

It has information on:

  * Further education and training places 
  * Courses available in higher education 
  * Courses for those on social welfare payments 
  * Grants, other financial supports and career guidance 

##  Higher education courses

The [ Springboard+ Programme ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-
to-college/springboard/) provides free higher education places if you are
unemployed and looking to return to the workforce. There is a range of part-
time courses from certificate to master’s degree levels - levels 6 to 9 on the
[ National Framework of Qualifications ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/the-
qualifications-system/national-framework-of-qualifications) .

[ Apprenticeships ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/apprenticeships/) offer you a mixture of on-the-job training with an
employer and off-the job training in a training centre. An apprenticeship
generally lasts for 2 to 4 years.

##  Adult education and community education courses

You don't need formal qualifications to take part in many of the full-time and
part-time courses in the adult education and community education sectors.

**Adult education** courses can include further and third-level education or
continuing education and training. Courses are available both part-time and
full-time.

**Community education** is adult education and learning, generally outside the
formal education sector. It promotes personalised learning and flexibility
within learning groups.

The [ Education and Training Boards (ETBs) ](http://www.etbi.ie/) , [ SOLAS
](http://www.solas.ie/) and other agencies fund continuing education and
training programmes. ETBs organise second-level, adult, community and second
chance education. You can contact your local ETB for more details. They also
operate the [ Vocational Training and Opportunities Scheme (VTOS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/returning-to-
education/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) which provides a range of
education and training courses if you are unemployed.

[ Further Education and Training (FET) courses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational-education-and-
training/training-courses/) help you develop or upgrade your skills in the
commercial and industrial sectors if you are unemployed or have been made
redundant. You can search online for training courses.

The Local Training Initiative Programme (LTI) is a project-based training and
work experience programme carried out in the local community. It is run by
local community groups. The programme is for unemployed people finding it
difficult to get a job. It is primarily aimed at people aged between 18 and
35. You can find LTI progammes through your local ETB Training Centre or on [
fetchcourses.ie ](http://www.fetchcourses.ie/) .

[ Community Training Centres ](http://www.iacto.ie/learners/ctcs/) are
independent community-based organisations. They look after the training and
employment needs of early school leavers, mainly aged between 16 and 21. If
you are aged between 15 and 20 and have left school without any formal
qualifications, the Youthreach programme will provide you with opportunities
for basic education, personal development, vocational training and work
experience.

##  Training and work experience

Employment schemes such as [ Community Employment
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-
schemes/community-employment-scheme/) and [ Tús ](/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/tus/) provide short-term work
opportunities for unemployed people. You can read more about the [ schemes to
support employment ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-
support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/) .

##  Financial supports for training or education

The [ Back to Education Programme ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-
to-education-programme/) can support if you are getting a social welfare
payment and you want to take up a second-level or third-level course.

The [ Part-Time Education Option
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/back-to-education/part-time-education-option/) allows you to keep
your Jobseeker's Allowance or Jobseeker's Benefit and attend a part-time day
or evening course.

The [ Education, Training and Development Option
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/back-to-education/education-training-and-development-option/) allows
you to keep your jobseeker’s payment and attend a course not covered by the
standard Back to Education Allowance such as a personal development course.

##  Other agencies and information supports

Agencies such as Fáilte Ireland, Bord Iascaigh Mhara (BIM), Teagasc, Coillte
and the Crafts Council of Ireland offer you specialist courses in their
specific areas of work.

Other organisations such as Centres for the Unemployed, Family Resource
Centres and Local Development Companies also provide training.

[ Skillnet Ireland ](https://www.skillnetireland.ie/) lets groups of private
sector companies set up training networks to deliver accredited and industry-
recognised programmes. Skillnet Ireland also offers some training to eligible
unemployed people. The training is free if you are unemployed.

You can get information on further and higher education and training courses
from Qualifax. The database includes [ information for adult learners
](http://www.qualifax.ie/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2:adult-
learners&catid=10:for-adult-learners&Itemid=42) and [ recognition of prior
learning
](http://www.qualifax.ie/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=161&Itemid=198)
with links to college and other education and training websites.

_**Page edited:** 22 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/learn-new-skills-or-
retrain/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Learn%20new%20skills%20or%20retrain&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/learn-new-skills-or-
retrain/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/learn-new-skills-or-
retrain/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Learn%20new%20skills%20or%20retrain&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-
work-and-changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/learn-new-skills-or-
retrain/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

1605.8683

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

1037.6493

  * [ _Updating your personal details on your driving licence or learner permit_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/updating-your-driving-licence-or-learner-permit/)

If you change your name or address, you can exchange your current driving
licence or learner permit for an updated one.

963.89294

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

