**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ State examinations ](/en/education/state-examinations/) > Leaving
Certificate 2021 and accredited grades

#  Leaving Certificate 2021 and accredited grades

  * How did the Leaving Certificate work in 2021? 
  * Leaving Certificate written exams 
  * How are accredited grades worked out? 
  * Leaving Certificate results 
  * How to appeal your results 
  * More information 

##  How did the Leaving Certificate work in 2021?

If you were a Leaving Certificate student in 2021, you could choose to:

  * Sit the written exam in June 2021, or 
  * Get an [ accredited grade from the State Examination Commission (SEC) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/7a163-a-guide-to-state-examinations-and-accredited-grades-for-leaving-certificate-2021/) , or 
  * Both sit the written exam and get an accredited grade from the SEC 

If you opted for both the written exam and an accredited grade in a subject,
your best grade was recorded in your Leaving Certificate results.

The Leaving Certificate results issued on the Candidate Self Service Portal
(see ‘Leaving Certificate results’ below).

The Department of Education has information about [ Leaving Certificate 2021
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/d3ea2-leaving-certificate-2021/) .

##  Leaving Certificate written exams

The Leaving Certificate written exams ran from 9 June to 29 June 2021.

The oral and coursework components of the exams were not included in the
accredited grade process.

Read more about changes made to [ assessment arrangements for Leaving
Certificate 2021 examinations
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/70c4d-further-adjustments-to-the-written-
examinations/) to take account of the disrupted learning experienced by
students during school closures in 2020 and 2021.

##  How are accredited grades worked out?

An _accredited grade_ was based on the estimated mark you would have gotten in
that subject in the Leaving Certificate exam. In 2020, the term _calculated
grade_ was used.

SEC accredited grades were offered to students taking the following Leaving
Certificate programmes:

  * [ Leaving Certificate ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/) – for your subjects 
  * [ Leaving Certificate Applied (LCA) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-applied/) – for your outstanding assessments, including your subjects, vocational specialisms and tasks due to be completed in the current LCA session 
  * [ Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme (LCVP) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-programme/) – for your LCVP Link Modules 

There were a number of steps involved to get an accredited grade.

###  **Step 1:** Estimated mark by your teacher

Your [ teacher gave you an estimate of the mark
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/4f535-a-guide-to-state-examinations-and-
accredited-grades-for-leaving-certificate-2021-step-1-teachers-estimation/)
based on your likely performance if you were to sit the 2021 Leaving
Certificate exam.

Your teacher used records of your performance and progress to get your
estimated percentage mark. For example, they used:

  * Classwork and homework 
  * Class assessments 
  * Your coursework over the 2 years of the Leaving Certificate cycle 

###  **Step 2:** In-school alignment by subject teachers in your school

Subject teachers in your school then reviewed the estimated percentage marks
of students in the school. Your teacher finalised their estimated percentage
marks following this [ alignment process
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/64f8b-a-guide-to-state-examinations-and-
accredited-grades-for-leaving-certificate-2021-step-2-school-alignment-of-
marks/) .

If your school had only one teacher of a subject, that teacher would carry out
the in-school alignment process with either:

  * The deputy principal of your school, or 
  * Another teacher of the same subject in your school who did not have a Leaving Certificate class in 2021. 

Your principal must have agreed to the arrangement.

###  **Step 3:** Oversight of marks by the school principal

The school principal [ reviewed the estimated percentage marks
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e67e8-a-guide-to-state-examinations-and-
accredited-grades-for-leaving-certificate-2021-step-3-oversight-of-the-
alignment-process-by-the-school-principal/) to make sure the process was fair.

###  **Step 4:** National standardisation

Your school principal [ submitted the estimated marks for national
standardisation ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9dc2a-a-guide-to-state-
examinations-and-accredited-grades-for-leaving-
certificate-2021-step-4-transmission-of-estimated-marks-for-national-
standardisation/) by 3 June 2021.

After the [ standardisation process
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e442c-a-guide-to-state-examinations-and-
accredited-grades-for-leaving-certificate-2021-standardisation-and-processing-
of-data-by-the-state-examinations-commission/) , the marks were converted into
SEC accredited grades.

You can find more information about State examinations and accredited grades
in:

  * [ A guide for Leaving Certificate students 2021 (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/124752/1e91aa2d-db43-4f18-8c3f-10c738cffb28.pdf)
  * [ A guide for Leaving Certificate Applied students 2021 (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/125709/7cd88f6a-a09c-49b6-b102-16f215248f5c.pdf)
  * [ Information for schools about Leaving Certificate 2021 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a6e80-leaving-certificate-2021-information-for-schools/) on gov.ie 

##  Leaving Certificate results

The Leaving Certificate results issued on the Candidate Self Service Portal
(CSSP) in September 2021.

If you opted for both the written exam and an accredited grade in a subject,
your best grade was recorded in your Leaving Certificate results.

Your results were provided directly to the CAO to process your application for
entry to higher education. First round [ CAO offers for colleges and
universities ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-
college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/) issued on 7 September
2021.

From 7 September, you could access details of the component marks for the
written exams and the estimated percentage mark for accredited grades on the
CCSP. You could also apply to view scripts for written exams in person in your
school.

Applications to view scripts closed on 8 September 2021.

You can read more about Leaving Certificate results for 2021 in:

  * [ Information for Leaving Certificate 2021 students ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9f53d-leaving-certificate-2021-information-for-students/) on gov.ie 
  * The [ candidate information guide to results and appeals ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/35c7c-candidate-information-guide-to-results-and-appeals/)

##  How to appeal your results

###  Written exam

If you were not satisfied with the marks you got in one or more subjects of
your written Leaving Certificate exam, you could appeal those results to the
State Examinations Commission (SEC).

If you appealed, your script was sent to an appeal examiner for re-marking.
Read more about [ appealing the Leaving Certificate written exam result
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/appeal-
leaving-cert/) .

###  SEC accredited grade

If you appealed an accredited grade, the appeal would only check that your
school data was correctly transferred to the SEC and that it was correctly
processed by the SEC.

If you were still unhappy at the end of this process, you could get
verification of the SEC’s processes by independent appeal scrutineers.

**Under the accredited grades system, the estimated percentage mark provided
by the teacher could not be reviewed.**

Students who felt that their case had not been processed correctly after the
appeals process could complain to the [ Ombudsman ](https://www.ombudsman.ie/)
or, in the case of students under 18 years of age, the [ Ombudsman for
Children ](https://www.oco.ie/) .

##  More information

You can read more about Leaving Certificate 2021 in:

  * [ A guide to State Examinations and accredited grades for Leaving Certificate 2021 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/7a163-a-guide-to-state-examinations-and-accredited-grades-for-leaving-certificate-2021/) on gov.ie 
  * [ Key dates and information for Leaving Certificate 2021 (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/126098/eb518b98-43d5-4649-9e1f-08eb1eff297e.pdf)

The Citizens Information Board has published [ a School Leaver's guide
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/en/publications/information/leaflets.html)
that covers many of the practical questions about education and employment
that you may have.

###  State Examinations Commission

Cornamaddy  
Athlone  
Westmeath  
Ireland

**Tel:** (090) 644 2700

**Fax:** (090) 644 2744

**Homepage:** [ http://www.examinations.ie/ ](http://www.examinations.ie/)

###  Department of Education

Marlborough Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 RC96  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 889 6400

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-education/)

**Email:** [ info@education.gov.ie ](mailto:info@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-cert-accredited-grades/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Leaving%20Certificate%202021%20and%20accredited%20grades&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-cert-accredited-grades/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-cert-accredited-grades/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Leaving%20Certificate%202021%20and%20accredited%20grades&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/leaving-cert-accredited-grades/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Leaving Certificate examination fees_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/examination-fees/)

Students taking the State Leaving Certificate examinations must pay
examination fees. Information on fees and exemptions from them.

1927.1403

  * [ _The State Examinations Commission_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/the-state-examinations-commission/)

Describes the work of the State Examinations Commission.

1648.2252

  * [ _Leaving Certificate_ ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/)

Information about the established Leaving Certificate programme.

1585.3428

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

