**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Environment ](/en/environment/) > [ Waste
and recycling ](/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/) > Burning waste and
vegetation

#  Burning waste and vegetation

  * Can I burn waste at home? 
  * Can I burn farmyard waste? 
  * Controlled fires and burning vegetation 
  * What can I do if my neighbour is burning waste? 
  * How can I safely dispose of my waste? 
  * More information on burning waste 

##  Can I burn waste at home?

Burning waste in your home or garden is illegal, as it can release harmful
chemicals into the air. It is illegal to burn household or garden waste in any
way, including:

  * In a barrel or exposed pile in a yard or garden 
  * On a bonfire 
  * On an open fire, range or other solid fuel appliance 
  * In a mini-incinerator 

**Note:** Garden incinerators and similar devices are illegal, even if they
are attached to a stack or flue.

This is an offence under:

  * [ Waste management regulations ](https://www.epa.ie/publications/compliance--enforcement/waste/burning-of-waste-regs.php)
  * [ The Air Pollution Act 1987 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1987/act/6/enacted/en/print.html)

If you are convicted of burning waste in your home or garden, you can be fined
up to €5,000.

###  **Why is burning waste illegal?**

Burning waste in your home or garden can release toxic dioxins into the air.
This can affect the air around you and may upset your neighbours.

For example, paper waste can contain synthetic materials and disposable
nappies contain gels, bleaches and plastics.

As well as contaminating the air, the by-products of low-temperature,
uncontrolled fires can become airborne and can then fall on and contaminate
near-by soil and vegetation.

Fires can also get out of control very easily. If you see any out of control
or unattended fires, you should report it to the Fire and Emergency Services
on 112 or 999.

Find out how to safely [ dispose of your household waste
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/domestic-refuse/) .

###  **Can I burn wood in my garden?**

It is illegal to burn any waste in your garden, including wood. Many wood
products are treated with toxic chemicals to prevent them from rotting.
Burning them can release harmful chemicals into the atmosphere and damage the
environment.

You can get rid of wood at a [ civic amenity site
](https://www.mywaste.ie/waste-service-locator/) .

###  **Can I burn plastic?**

It is illegal to burn plastic at home or in your garden.

In general, plastics can be put into your green bin and recycled. Find out
more about how to [ dispose of plastic products ](https://www.mywaste.ie/page-
what-to-do-with/) .

##  Can I burn farmyard waste?

It is illegal to burn farmyard waste. There was an exemption which allowed
farmers to burn agricultural green waste, such as untreated wood, bushes or
leaves. However, this exemption ended 30 November 2023.

Organic material can be [ composted
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/composting-domestic-waste/#7ccbf8) at home or on the farm. You can
get rid of wood at a [ civic amenity site ](https://www.mywaste.ie/waste-
service-locator/) .

###  **Other farmyard waste**

Farmers can bring farm plastics to a [ bring-centre to be recycled
](https://farmplastics.ie/bring-centres/) including material such as:

  * Silage wrap 
  * Fertiliser bags 
  * Animal feed bags 
  * Chemical drums (these must be triple rinsed) 
  * Bailing twine 

The Irish Farmers Association (IFA) has a useful [ guide on managing waste
(pdf) ](https://www.ifa.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/IFA-SmartFarming-
Waste-A4-Mar23-v6Digital.pdf) .

##  Controlled fires and burning vegetation

Landowners sometimes use controlled burning as a way of managing land, for
example, by burning off old vegetation to promote new grass growth.

Landowners can carry out controlled fires on uncultivated land from 1
September to the last day in February each year. This is only allowed if it is
done in a controlled manner and the landowner follows the correct safety
procedures. Uncultivated land is land which is not normally farmed or managed.

###  **Planning a controlled fire**

If you plan on carrying out a controlled burn, you must have a [ burning plan
(pdf).
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/125030/cd7b70f4-f52a-4664-9908-e52a20738e44.pdf#%5B%7B%22num%22%3A67%2C%22gen%22%3A0%7D%2C%7B%22name%22%3A%22XYZ%22%7D%2C596%2C767%2C0%5D)
This will include information such as:

  * The location of the planned burn 
  * When the burn is due to happen 
  * The conditions under which the burn can got ahead 
  * The objectives of the burn 
  * The people involved 
  * The equipment to be used 
  * Health and safety precautions 

Gov.ie have a useful document on the [ prescribed burning code of practice
(pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/125030/cd7b70f4-f52a-4664-9908-e52a20738e44.pdf)
.

You should always let the local fire department know when you are planning a
burn and when the burn is over and the fire is extinguished.

You should only carry out a burn if the weather is suitable, with light or no
winds. Met Éireann have a [ Fire Weather Index
](https://www.met.ie/forecasts/farming/graphs/Fire-weather-index) which you
should check before planning a fire.

If you are burning vegetation within a mile of woodland, you must let both the
Gardaí and the owner of the wood know in writing at least 7 days before you
end to you plan the fire. The owner of the forest may object to the fire.

###  **Can I burn uncultivated land outside the allowed period?**

You are not allowed to burn uncultivated land between 1 March and 31 August.

If you burn land between 1 March and 31 August, you could:

  * Be prosecuted and fined up to €63,490, face a prison term of up to 2 years, or be both fined and imprisoned 
  * Be ineligible for certain schemes (such as the [ Basic Income Support for Sustainability scheme ](/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-for-sustainability-scheme-for-farmers/) ) 
  * Have your payments for certain schemes reduced 

There may be more restrictions if your actions damage a:

  * Special Area of Conservation (SAC) 
  * Special Protection Area 
  * Natural Heritage Area 

If you see any out of control or unattended fires, you should report it to the
Fire and Emergency Services on 112 or 999.

##  What can I do if my neighbour is burning waste?

If your neighbour is burning waste, you should:

  1. Talk to your neighbour about the situation and ask them to stop burning their waste 
  2. If you are unable to resolve the issue with your neighbour directly, you should contact your [ local authority ](https://www.housingagency.ie/find-my-local-authority)
  3. If the issue remains unresolved, you can contact the National Environmental Complaints Line on 1800 365 123. You can also use the mobile app, ‘See It? Say It!’ to report the issue. 

##  How can I safely dispose of my waste?

Most areas have an organised [ household waste collection
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/domestic-refuse/) service. If you decide not to use an organised
waste collection service, you can dispose of most of your domestic waste by [
recycling ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/recycling-household-waste/) and [ home composting
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/composting-domestic-waste/) . You can also use civic amenity centres
or [ landfill sites ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-
and-recycling/landfill-sites/) .

Your [ local authority ](https://www.housingagency.ie/find-my-local-authority)
can advise you on waste disposal and recycling facilities in your area.

For farmyard plastics, you can bring them to a [ bring centre
](https://farmplastics.ie/bring-centres/) or else [ organise a collection
](https://farmplastics.ie/farmyard-collections/) . You can read more about
what to do with farmyard plastics at [ farmplastics.ie
](https://farmplastics.ie/) .

##  More information on burning waste

Read more about burning waste on the Environmental Protection Agency's [
website ](https://www.epa.ie/take-action/in-the-community/waste/backyard-
burning/) .

You can check air quality in your local area on [ AirQuality.ie
](https://airquality.ie/) .

_**Page edited:** 29 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-
and-recycling/burning-household-waste/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Burning%20waste%20and%20vegetation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-
and-recycling/burning-household-waste/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-
and-recycling/burning-household-waste/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Burning%20waste%20and%20vegetation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-
and-recycling/burning-household-waste/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Recycling household waste_ ](/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/recycling-household-waste/)

Describes where to recycle domestic waste and what happens to recycled items

1815.6885

  * [ _Household waste disposal_ ](/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/domestic-refuse/)

How you dispose of household rubbish in Ireland

1788.0042

  * [ _Brown bins and composting food and garden waste at home_ ](/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/composting-domestic-waste/)

Recycling and composting organic waste reduces household waste sent to
landfill. What goes in the brown bin and how to home compost?

1740.725

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

