**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Employment ](/en/employment/) > [
Employment rights and conditions ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/) > [ Health and safety ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/health-and-safety/) > Smoking in the workplace

#  Smoking in the workplace

  * What is the smoking ban? 
  * Rules for smoking in the workplace 
  * Providing a place to smoke 
  * Am I entitled to smoking breaks? 
  * Vaping at work 
  * Fines for smoking in a place of work 
  * Employers' obligations 
  * Complain about smoking in the workplace 
  * Where to complain 

##  What is the smoking ban?

Public health laws state that smoking is not allowed in enclosed workplaces to
protect employees and the public from exposure to the [ harmful and toxic
effects of tobacco smoke
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/tobaccocontrol/kf/) .

The law covering smoking in the workplace is the [ Public Health (Tobacco) Act
2002-2015 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2002/act/6/enacted/en/html) .

##  Rules for smoking in the workplace

You are not allowed to smoke in an enclosed place of work. This includes
various settings such as offices, aircraft, trains, company vehicles, health
premises, schools, colleges, cinemas, theatres, licensed premises, and clubs.

###  Exempt premises

Certain premises are exempt from the ban on smoking in the workplace,
including:

  * [ Prisons ](/en/justice/prison-system/prison-system-in-ireland/)
  * Police station detention areas 
  * Nursing homes 
  * Hospices 
  * Religious order homes 
  * The Central Mental Hospital 
  * [ Psychiatric hospitals ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/admission-to-a-psychiatric-hospital/)
  * Bedrooms in hotels, guesthouses and bed and breakfast accommodation 
  * Third-level educational residential facilities. 

While these places are exempt, employers can still designate certain areas of
their premises as _smoking_ or _non-smoking_ to minimise risk.

For example, the owners of a nursing home could specify that residents can
only smoke outside or in a designated smoking room.

##  Providing a place to smoke

Your employer does not have to provide an outdoor smoking area for staff or
customers.

However, if they choose to do so, the smoking area must be outdoors and be
either uncovered or only partially covered.

###  Common areas of buildings

The smoking ban also applies to common areas within buildings. This covers
corridors, lobby areas and reception areas of buildings such as apartment
blocks and hotels.

##  Am I entitled to smoking breaks?

By law, you are not entitled to smoking breaks.

You are only entitled to [ time off work for breaks
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/hours-of-work/work-breaks-
and-rest-periods/) as set down in [ Section 12 of the Organisation of Working
Time Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0020/sec0012.html#zza20y1997s12)
.

##  Vaping at work

E-cigarettes (or vapes) are not covered under the smoking ban. Your employer
should have its own policy on using e-cigarettes in the workplace. If you are
unsure about the rules on vaping in your workplace, check with your employer.

##  Fines for smoking in a place of work

If you breach the ban on smoking in the workplace, you can get a [ Class B
fine ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/) .

Employers are legally responsible for ensuring that staff, customers, and
visitors comply with the ban on smoking in the workplace.

##  Employers' obligations

Employers and managers must:

  * Have a smoke-free policy and communicate it clearly 
  * Display “No Smoking” signs 
  * Provide external stubbing bins at entrances where appropriate 

###  Inspections of workplace compliance

Environmental Health Officers from the [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/health-boards/)
inspect workplaces to make sure that the ban is being implemented.

They check that smoke-free measures are implemented in workplaces connected
with the food, hospitality, and leisure sectors as part of their general
compliance with health and safety requirements.

You can read more [ about tobacco control on the HSE website
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/tobaccocontrol/) .

##  Complain about smoking in the workplace

If you have a complaint about people smoking in a workplace, first inform the
owner or manager of the business.

If you are unsatisfied with how your complaint is dealt with, contact your
local Environmental Health Service within the HSE or call the National Tobacco
Control Office compliance line on 1800 333100.

##  Where to complain

Contact your [ local Environmental Health Officer.
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/Contact.html)

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Smoking%20in%20the%20workplace&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Smoking%20in%20the%20workplace&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-
workplace/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Equality in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/equality-in-work/equality-in-the-workplace/)

Employment equality legisation makes discrimination illegal in certain
employment-related areas.

1623.5713

  * [ _Accidents in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/accidents-in-the-workplace/)

Find out what you should do if you have an accident while at work or on your
way to work.

1497.9703

  * [ _Data protection in the workplace_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-protection-at-work/data-protection-in-the-workplace/)

Overview of some of the main obligations for employers and outlines the rights
of employees under Data Protection law.

1415.9478

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

