**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Primary and post-primary education ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/) > [ Going to primary school ](/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/) > Primary school transport
scheme

#  Primary school transport scheme

  * What is the primary school transport scheme? 
  * Who can use the School Transport Scheme? 
  * Payment of School Transport fees 
  * How to apply for the School Transport Scheme 
  * More information 

##  What is the primary school transport scheme?

The school transport scheme provides transport for children who live 3.2 km or
more from their local primary school. The [ scheme is funded by the Department
of Education ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/) .

**Applications for school transport services 2024-2025 are now open** . **The
closing date for on-time applications is 26 April 2024.**

You can submit your application on the [ Bus Éireann
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=256) website (see ‘How to apply for
the School Transport Scheme’ below).

**Pupils from Ukraine**

Pupils from Ukraine should visit [ gov.ie/ukraine
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/320e9-employment-and-education/#education)
for details on how to apply for school transport. They should not apply on the
Bus Éireann website. Applications will continue to be accepted as families are
relocated or as new families arrive.

###  **Proposed changes to school transport scheme**

A review of the school transport scheme has recommended changes to how the
scheme works, so that more students can use buses by 2030.

It recommends:

  * Removing the ‘nearest school’ requirement if there are existing bus routes or if there is enough demand for a new route (at least 10 pupils) 
  * Reducing the distance required for pupils to qualify for the school transport scheme 

You can read a [ summary report (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/285289/?page=null) and [ the full final report (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/285291/b8dea5c5-5c6b-4888-b695-39e38d7a60ea.pdf#page=null)
of the school transport review on gov.ie.

##  Who can use the School Transport Scheme?

To qualify for school transport, a child must be aged between 4 and 12 years
and living 3.2 km or more from the nearest suitable national school.

[ Children with special needs ](/en/education/special-education-needs/school-
transport-for-children-with-special-needs/) are also eligible for free
transport to and from special schools and to special classes.

If there are spare seats available, children who are not eligible can be
carried on school transport.

Bus Éireann provides a list of [ FAQs about the School Transport Scheme
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=354) .

###  Schools

The Department of Education decides what the nearest suitable school is. If a
child is attending a school that has more than one teacher and there is a one-
teacher school nearer the home, that fact will not usually disqualify the
child from using the school transport scheme.

Children attending multi-denominational schools or Gaelscoileanna (Irish-
speaking schools) are eligible if they meet the distance requirements to their
school. They are not disqualified because there is another national school
nearer to them. There are also special arrangements for Protestant children
attending Protestant schools and children living in remote areas.

###  Pick-up points

The scheme is not a door-to-door service. Parents/guardians are responsible
for bringing their children to the nearest pick-up point to avail of the
service. Generally, routes are planned so pupils don't have to travel more
than 2.4 km to their nearest pick-up point.

If there is no school transport service available, you may be able to get a
grant towards the costs of private transport for a child who cannot get to
school without transport due to an illness or disability.

###  Establishing and retaining a school transport service

There must be enough children to use the service. This means that there must
be a daily average (over a school term) of at least 10 eligible children in a
distinct area attending their nearest suitable school.

###  Closed or merged schools

The following rules applied in the school year 2011-2012.

  * Children in a closed school area who are living **within 3.2 km** from a ‘school of amalgamation’ are no longer eligible for transport to that school, but they may apply for concessionary transport if there are seats available 
  * Current pupils who are eligible for transport under the Central/Closed School Rule (CSR)*, and who live **3.2 km or more** from their school of amalgamation will remain eligible for the rest of their primary schooling 

*In the school year 2010-2011 when 2 or more primary schools merged, the children for whom the closed school would have been the nearest could only have transport to the school that was the result of the merger. Under the CSR some children living less than 3.2 km from such a ‘school of amalgamation’ were eligible for school transport. 

From the 2012-2013 school year, eligibility based on the CSR ceased for all
new pupils entering primary schools. This may mean that where there is now a
school that is nearer than the school of amalgamation, siblings in some
families may have school transport eligibility to different schools from the
2012-2013 school year onward.

The Department of Education publishes detailed information on [ the conditions
governing the primary school transport scheme (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/38417/dc25dd9e2e894e18b9efaeb5ceba75b3.pdf) .

###  Remote area grants

Remote area grants are payable by the Department as a contribution towards
private transport arrangements for eligible pupils for whom no transport
service is available. These grants may also be paid for eligible pupils who
live 3.2 km or more from the nearest pick-up point for school transport.

##  Payment of School Transport fees

The School Transport Scheme 2024-2025 fee for a primary school child is €50
and for a post- primary school child is €75. The maximum fee for a family is
€125.

The closing date for on-time applications is **26 April 2024** .

The closing date for payments is **7 June 2024** .

**If you make a late payment or submit medical card details after the deadline
date,** you are not guaranteed a seat.

##  How to apply for the School Transport Scheme

The scheme is operated by Bus Éireann on behalf of the Department. If your
child is enrolling in national school for the first time, you can apply for
school transport [ online on the Bus Éireann website
](http://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=257) .

Applications for the 2024-2025 school year are open. The closing date for on-
time applications is **26 April 2024** . If you apply after the closing date,
it is considered a late application.

If you have questions about school transport, you can [ contact Bus Éireann
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=290#contact) or contact the [ School
Transport Section of the Department of Education
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/07a71-school-
transport/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/#contact)
(see 'More information' below).

To ask about timetables, pick-up points, routes and applications for transport
grants, you should contact your [ local Bus Éireann school transport office
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=523) .

###  Applications for the remote area grant

You should apply in writing directly to the School Transport section of the
Department of Education at the address below.

###  Appeals

If you wish to appeal a decision on your application for school transport, you
should download the [ appeal form (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/87018/dca9ecde-01ec-498a-bd03-f60dd97bbdb4.pdf)
and send the completed form to the [ School Transport Appeals Board
](https://www.schooltransportappeals.ie/) c/o the Department of Education at
the address below.

##  More information

You can find [ regional contact numbers for the School Transport Section of
the Department of Education ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/07a71-school-
transport/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/#contact)
on Gov.ie.

You can also find [ contact details for Bus Éireann's school transport offices
](https://www.buseireann.ie/inner.php?id=523) on the Bus Éireann website.

###  Department of Education

School Transport Section  
Portlaoise Road  
Tullamore  
Offaly  
Ireland

**Tel:** (057) 932 5466/7

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/school-transport/)

**Email:** [ school_transport@education.gov.ie
](mailto:school_transport@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 8 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-transport-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Primary%20school%20transport%20scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-transport-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-transport-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Primary%20school%20transport%20scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/primary-school-transport-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _School transport for post-primary students_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-transport-scheme/)

The Department of Education provides subsidised school transport for eligible
post-primary students.

2075.7537

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1590.5035

  * [ _School transport for children with special needs_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/school-transport-for-children-with-special-needs/)

Children who are enrolled in State special schools or in special classes in
State primary schools may qualify for free transport to school.

1495.2365

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

