**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Education and Training ](/en/education/)
> [ Special education needs ](/en/education/special-education-needs/) > The
law on special educational needs

#  The law on special educational needs

  * Introduction 
  * Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act 2004 
  * Education Acts 1998-2022 
  * Equal Status Acts 2000-2018 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

You are a person with special educational needs if your ability to take part
in, and benefit from, education is restricted, due to a continued physical,
sensory, mental health or learning disability.

The law covering special educational needs is complex. It is spread across the
Irish Constitution and several other pieces of legislation.

###  **Irish Constitution**

The Irish Constitution sets out [ the role of the State and the rights of
parents in providing education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/constitution-and-education/) .

All children have a constitutional right to free primary education up to the
age of 18, including children with special educational needs.

###  **Legislation**

The following Acts cover different elements of special educational needs:

  * [ Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act 2004 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2004/act/30/enacted/en/html)
  * [ Education Acts 1998-2022 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1998/act/51/enacted/en/html)
  * [ Equal Status Acts 2000-2018 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2000/act/8/enacted/en/html)

##  Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act 2004

Under the [ Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs (EPSEN) Act
2004 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2004/act/30/revised/en/html) ,
children with special educational needs should be educated in an inclusive
setting, unless this would:

  * Not be in the best interests of the child, or 
  * Not be in the best interests of effectively providing education for other children in mainstream education 

While the Act is passed, some parts are not yet in effect.

The Act provides that:

  * People with special educational needs are educated in an inclusive environment, as far as possible 
  * People with special educational needs have the same right to access and benefit from education as children who don’t have these needs 
  * Parents have more involvement in the education of their children and decision making 

The Act also established the [ National Council for Special Education (NCSE)
](https://ncse.ie/) on a statutory basis.

###  **Services for people with special educational needs**

The Act sets out services to be provided to people with special educational
needs. However, the relevant sections of the Act have not yet been commenced,
so the services (including personal education plans) are not yet in place.

Under the Disability Act 2005, [ assessments of need
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-
services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-
disabilites/) can be carried out by the HSE. If a child must have their
educational needs assessed, the HSE will contact the NCSE, who will nominate a
person to complete a [ Report of Education Needs ](https://ncse.ie/completing-
the-report-of-education-needs) .

The NCSE is responsible for providing services to school-going children.

The Department of Education provides supports to children with a disability.

###  **Special Education Appeals Board**

The Act provides for a Special Education Appeals Board to be set up.

The section of the Act to set up the Board has been commenced, but sections
which give people the right to appeal have not been commenced. So, the Board
is not yet in operation.

##  Education Acts 1998-2022

The [ Education Acts 1998-2022
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0051/index.html) deal with
education generally, but emphasise the rights of children with disabilities
and other special educational needs.

The Acts set out certain aims, including:

  * Making sure children, including children with special educational needs, can access their constitutional right to education 
  * Providing a level and quality of education appropriate to the needs and abilities of people in Ireland, as far as is practicable with the resources available 

###  **Funding**

Under the 1998 Act, the Minister for Education has responsibilities in
relation to funding, including funding support services for students with
disabilities.

Schools must:

  * Use available resources to meet the educational needs of all students, including those with disabilities 
  * Use State resources to make reasonable provisions and accommodation for students with disabilities and special educational needs (including any necessary changes to buildings, or for purchase of equipment) 

The Act also provides that the criteria for funding of schools may allow for
the payment of additional grants to schools, considering the level of
educational disadvantage.

###  **Support services**

The 1998 Act defines support services, including:

  * Assessment of students 
  * Guidance and counselling services 
  * Technical aids and equipment, including means of access to schools, adaptations to buildings to allow access, and transport for students with special needs and their families 
  * Provision for students learning through Irish sign language or other sign language, including interpreting services 
  * Provision for early childhood, primary, post-primary, adult or continuing education to students with special needs, other than in schools or centres for education 

Under the [ Education (Provision in Respect of Children with Special
Educational Needs) Act 2022 (pdf)
](https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/act/2022/22/eng/enacted/a2222.pdf)
, a school can be directed to work with the NCSE and put a special class in
place.

Read the Department of Education’s information for schools about [ providing
for children with special educational needs (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/240372/f025d1bf-0cb9-44cb-9eed-b4d092fc9158.pdf) .

##  Equal Status Acts 2000-2018

The [ Equal Status Act 2000-2018
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2000/act/8/enacted/en/html) bans
discrimination in different areas of life, mainly in the provision of goods
and services. The Acts apply to educational services, including private
schools and pre-school facilities.

There are specific provisions in the Acts in relation to education, and some
of these focus on people with disabilities or special needs.

The Equal Status Acts ban direct and indirect discrimination on many grounds,
including gender, religion, disability, race and membership of the Traveller
community.

A school cannot discriminate against a student in relation to their:

  * Admission, or the terms and conditions of their admission 
  * Access to any course, facility or benefit provided 
  * Terms or condition of participation in the school 
  * Expulsion or any other sanction 

###  **Discrimination on grounds of disability**

The Equal Status Acts set out certain activities that do not constitute
discrimination. The following relate to discrimination on the grounds of
disability:

  * Schools can make different arrangements for sport for children based on their age, gender, or disability if these are reasonably necessary. 
  * Schools will not be considered to discriminate against a student with a disability if complying with the legislation would have a seriously detrimental effect on, or make it impossible to provide, services to other students. 
  * In certain circumstances, discrimination on the grounds of disability can happen if the school fails to do all that is reasonable to accommodate the needs of a person with a disability. If a person with a disability cannot use a service without special treatment or facilities being provided, then the service provider may need to provide such special arrangements if there is only a _nominal_ (small) cost involved.* 

* The Act clarifies that the nominal cost issue does not prejudice or dilute the various provisions in the Education Act 1998 in relation to children with a disability. As these provisions all relate to the use of public funds, private primary schools are only obliged to make special provision for children with disabilities if there is only a nominal cost involved. 

You can read more about the Equal Status Acts 2000-2018 in the Irish Human
Rights and Equality Commission’s [ Equal Status Acts guide (pdf)
](https://www.ihrec.ie/app/uploads/2022/08/IHREC-Equal-Status-Rights-Leaflet-
WEB.pdf) .

##  More information

###  Special Education Section

Department of Education and Skills

Cornamaddy  
Athlone  
Westmeath  
N37 X659  
Ireland

**Tel:** (090) 648 4187

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/b05378-special-
education-section/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-
information/b05378-special-education-section/)

**Email:** [ special_education@education.gov.ie
](mailto:special_education@education.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 25 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/the-law-on-special-educational-
needs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=The%20law%20on%20special%20educational%20needs&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/the-law-on-special-educational-
needs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/the-law-on-special-educational-
needs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=The%20law%20on%20special%20educational%20needs&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/special-
education-needs/the-law-on-special-educational-
needs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Special educational needs_ ](/en/education/special-education-needs/special-education/)

This page describes the special arrangements for the education of children
with special educational needs.

2725.2473

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001–2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

1630.8617

  * [ _The law on selling or buying sex_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-sex/)

Selling sexual services is legal in Ireland in some circumstances.

1630.8617

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

