**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/) > Fundamental rights under the Irish Constitution

#  Fundamental rights under the Irish Constitution

  * Introduction 
  * Personal rights 
  * The rights of the family 
  * Property rights 
  * Religious freedom 

##  Introduction

[ The Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) recognises and declares that people
living in Ireland have certain fundamental personal rights.

Articles 40 to 44 set out these fundamental rights. Many of the rights apply
to everyone living in Ireland, including non-Irish citizens.

The rights that are set out in these articles have been interpreted by the
courts, and some articles have been amended since the Constitution was written
in 1937. The courts have found that some rights are protected by the
Constitution, even though they are not explicitly mentioned in the text.

Fundamental rights are not absolute - they can be limited or restricted by the
Oireachtas for certain reasons (for the common good or to keep public order
for example).

If there is a conflict between two or more constitutional rights in a case,
the courts will look at all the circumstances and weigh all of the factors to
decide how that particular conflict is to be dealt with. For instance, there
is often a clash between one person’s right to freedom of expression and
another person’s right to their good name.

##  Personal rights

[ Article 40 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#article40) sets
out ‘personal rights’, including:

###  Equality before the law

All citizens shall be held equal before the law (Article 40.1 of the
Constitution). This means that the State cannot unjustly, unreasonably or
arbitrarily discriminate between citizens. You cannot be treated as inferior
or superior to any other person in society simply because of your human
attributes or your ethnic, racial, social or religious background.

However, when the State is making laws, it may consider differences of
capacity and of social function between individuals in society.

###  Right to life

The Constitution specifically recognises and protects your right to life
(Article 40.3).

Your right to life also means the right to have nature take its course and to
die a natural death. That does not mean that you have the right to have your
life terminated or death unnaturally accelerated.

In May 2018, the people voted in a referendum to allow the Oireachtas to pass
laws regulating the termination of pregnancy. The [ Health (Regulation of
Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2018/105/) was signed into law on 20
December 2018.

###  Personal liberty

The Constitution guarantees that you have a right to liberty and freedom,
except in accordance with the law (Article 40.4).

This means that, in general, you are entitled to your own personal freedom
except where regulated by law. In addition, the law may provide for your
detention in certain circumstances and the State may only breach your right to
personal liberty in circumstances that come within that law.

If you believe that you are being [ detained ](/en/justice/arrests/detention-
after-arrest/) or held unlawfully, you can make an application to the High
Court. If the person or institution detaining you cannot justify your
detention or prove that it is lawful, the High Court may order that you be
released. This is called a _habeas corpus_ order.

You have a right to move freely within the State. You also have a broader
right to travel and to get a passport for the purpose of travelling.

Your right to a passport may be restricted or limited. For example, before
granting you [ bail ](/en/justice/arrests/bail-and-surety/) , a court may
require you to hand over your passport. The State may also restrict your right
to travel abroad for the purposes of national security.

###  Freedom of expression

You have a right to freely express your convictions and opinions (Article
40.6.1.i). However, that right can be limited in the interests of public order
and morality. You can also not use this right to [ defame ](/en/justice/civil-
law/law-on-defamation/) someone else as this would interfere their
constitutional right to a good name.

The Constitution also states that it is an offence to publish or utter
seditious (material undermining the authority of the State or advocating for
the overthrow of the State) or indecent material.

Following a referendum in May 2018, the [ Thirty-seventh Amendment of the
Constitution (Repeal of offence of publication or utterance of blasphemous
matter) Act 2018 ](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2018/87/) was
passed. Blasphemy is no longer a constitutional offence.

The State is also obliged by the Constitution to make sure that media such as
the radio, the press and the cinema are not used to undermine public order or
morality or the authority of the State. For example, the [ Censorship
](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/censorship/) of Publications
Acts and the Censorship of Films Acts allow [ censorship ](/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/censorship/) of publications like books, films
and DVDs.

###  Freedom of assembly

You have a right to assemble or meet peacefully and without weapons (Article
40.6.1.ii). This right is limited by legislation to protect public order and
morality. The law prevents or controls meetings that are calculated or
designed to cause a riot or breach of the peace or which may be a danger to
the general public.

There are other limitations on your freedom of assembly. You cannot meet on
private property without the consent of the owner - that is trespass. Parades
and processions are not illegal but it is a public nuisance to obstruct a
highway without authorisation.

You may not hold a procession or meeting within half a mile of the Houses of
the Oireachtas when a chief superintendent or higher ranking garda informs the
organisers of such an event that it is prohibited or where any garda within
that half-mile radius asks you to disperse.

###  Freedom of association

The Constitution guarantees your right to form associations and [ unions
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-
trade-unions/trade-unions/) (Article 40.6.1.iii). You may form any type of
association for whatever purpose you choose, whether it is sporting, social,
charitable, commercial or political.

This right is limited by legislation to protect public order and morality. For
example, associations formed for the purpose of treason or some anti-
constitutional or illegal purpose cannot rely on this right to freedom of
association.

Similarly, you can’t force someone to join any particular association or union
or always force a union or association to accept you.

###  The right to fair procedures

The courts and all public bodies or persons making decisions that affect your
constitutional rights must treat you fairly. Two of the essential components
of fair procedures in this context are:

  * The person making the decision that affects you should not be biased or appear to be biased. 
  * You must be given an adequate opportunity to present your case. You must be informed of the matter and you must be given a chance to comment on the material put forward by the other side. 

###  Bodily integrity

You have a right not to have your body or person unjustifiably interfered
with. A person can only interfere with your body with a valid justification
and in a proportionate manner. Similarly, you have a right not to be subjected
to torture, inhumane or degrading treatment.

If you are in custody, you have a right not to have your health endangered [
while in prison ](/en/justice/prison-system/prisoners-rights/) .

###  Trial by jury

Your constitutional right to trial by jury only exists in certain criminal
cases.

If you have been charged with a " [ non-minor" offence ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases/) , you will
be tried by a judge sitting with a jury. There are some offences for which you
will be given a choice - whether you want to have your case decided by a
District Court judge sitting alone or by a judge sitting with a jury.

The [ jury ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury/) must consist of those who have been
chosen at random from a diverse range of jurors from the community.

###  **The right to privacy**

The Constitution does not specifically state a right to privacy but the courts
recognise that the personal rights in the Constitution imply the right to
privacy. It has sometimes been described as the right “to be let alone” in
private settings.

For example, your private written communications and telephone conversations
cannot be deliberately, consciously and unjustifiably interfered with. Your
rights to cast a secret ballot in elections and to the confidentiality of
medical details are other examples of the right to privacy in action.

However, your right to privacy may be limited or restricted by legislation in
the interests of the common good, public order and morality.

###  The right to earn a livelihood

As a citizen, you have a right to work and to earn a living, whether you are
male or female. However, that general right doesn’t mean that you can insist
on being employed in a particular role or area or by a particular employer.

The State has a general duty to protect your right to work and earn a
livelihood from unjust attack.

###  Inviolability of a citizen's dwelling

The Constitution declares that the dwelling of a citizen is _inviolable_ and
shall not be entered forcibly except in accordance with the law (Article
40.5). This means that no one, including the Gardaí, may enter the place where
you live without a warrant or other legal authority to enter.

If you are arrested as a result of an unlawful entry into your home, your
arrest is illegal. [ Evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-
evidence/) obtained as a result of an unlawful entry onto your dwelling may be
inadmissible in court.

##  The rights of the family

The family founded on marriage possesses a collection of constitutional rights
(Article 41 and 42). These include:

  * The right to marital privacy. 
  * The right of coupes to make their own decisions about family planning. 
  * The right to consort together, to enjoy each other's company and to procreate. This right may be limited or restricted where a [ family member is in prison ](/en/justice/prison-system/prisoners-rights/) or where one spouse is not an Irish citizen. The right of parents to be the main and natural educators of their children. The State must respect your right as parents to provide for the religious, moral, intellectual, physical and social education of your children. The State cannot oblige you to send your children to school or to any particular type of school but it may require that children receive a certain minimum education. 
  * The right to free primary education - this means that the State must contribute towards for your children's primary education. State aid for schools must not discriminate between schools of different religions. 
  * The right to decide the religion of your children. The State cannot interfere with this right. 

Many of these rights equally apply to non-marital families.

There is a constitutional principle that married parents have equal rights to
and are joint guardians of their children. If the parents separate or divorce,
the courts may decide who will have [ custody of the children ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-and-divorce-children/)
. The paramount consideration is the welfare of the children.

###  **The rights of children**

Article 42A was added to the Constitution in 2015. It affirms children’s
natural and imprescriptible rights and the State’s duty to uphold these
rights. Children have the right for their best interests to be of paramount
consideration where the State seeks to intervene to protect their safety and
welfare.

This right applies in all court proceedings concerning adoption, guardianship,
custody, and access. In these proceedings, children also have the right to
have their views ascertained and considered by the courts. The courts are to
have regard to a child’s age and maturity when considering their views in
accordance with this right.

##  Property rights

The Constitution declares that the State will vindicate the property rights of
every citizen. This means that you have a right to own, transfer and inherit
property. You also have the right to [ bequeath property upon your death
](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate/) . The
State guarantees to pass no law to abolish these rights.

Article 43 acknowledges that these rights ought to be regulated by the
principles of social justice. This means that the State may pass laws limiting
your right to private property in the interests of the common good. The most
common form of limitation is taxation on ownership, transfer and inheritance.

Other examples of restrictions or limitations on your right to own property
include town and regional planning, protection of national monuments,
compulsory acquisition of land.

If the State passes a law that otherwise restricts your property rights, it
may be required to compensate you for this restriction.

##  Religious freedom

[ Article 44 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#article44) of
the Constitution deals with religion.

You are free to practise your religion and your freedom of conscience. The
State guarantees not to endow or favour any religion and not to discriminate
on the grounds of religion.

State aid for schools cannot discriminate between schools of different
religious denominations. Every child has the right to attend a denominational
school receiving State funding without having to participate in religious
instruction in the school.

Your right to religious liberty may be limited to protect public order and
morality.

_**Page edited:** 29 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Fundamental%20rights%20under%20the%20Irish%20Constitution&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Fundamental%20rights%20under%20the%20Irish%20Constitution&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-
rights/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The Irish Constitution_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/)

Bunreacht na hÉireann (the Irish Constitution) is the fundamental legal
document that sets out how Ireland should be governed and the rights of Irish
citizens.

2016.5208

  * [ _Irish Constitution and education_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/constitution-and-education/)

The Irish Constitution (Bunreacht na hÉireann) contains specific articles on
education, religion, and the family, which affect how education is organised.

1703.3438

  * [ _Convention on the Constitution_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitutional-convention/)

The Constitutional Convention was set up in 2012 to consider possible changes
to the Constitution. Several of its recommendations resulted in constitutional
amendments.

1690.4514

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

