**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Ireland and the UK ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-
the-uk/) > Cross border workers in Ireland

#  Cross border workers in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * What is a cross border worker? 
  * Who can live in Ireland and work in Northern Ireland? 
  * Non-EEA family members 
  * Tax 
  * Social welfare 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The rules about cross border working on the island of Ireland have changed for
some people because Northern Ireland is [ no longer part of the EU
](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/what-is-brexit/) .

Irish citizens can continue to live and work in Northern Ireland and the rest
of the UK. British citizens can live and work in Ireland. Both Irish and UK
citizens can live in Ireland and work in Northern Ireland (or live in Northern
Ireland and work in Ireland).

If you are an EEA citizen (the EU, plus Iceland, Norway and Lichtenstein) and
you were living in Ireland and working in Northern Ireland before the end of
2020, you had to apply for a Frontier Worker Permit to continue working in
Northern Ireland after 1 July 2021.

If you are an EEA citizen (not Irish) who lived in Northern Ireland before 31
December 2020 you had to apply for the [ EU Settlement Scheme
](https://www.gov.uk/settled-status-eu-citizens-families) to continue living
in Northern Ireland.

EEA citizens (not Irish) who start working in Northern Ireland for the first
time after the end of 2020, must apply through the UK Points Based Immigration
System [ UK points based immigration scheme ](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/new-
immigration-system-what-you-need-to-know) .

##  What is a cross border worker?

A cross border worker (also called a ‘frontier worker’) is a person who lives
in one country and works in another country, returning to the country they
live in at least once a week.

For example, if you live in Ireland and work in Northern Ireland, you are a
cross border worker if you return to your home in Ireland at least once a
week.

The rules covering cross border workers on the island of Ireland have changed
because Northern Ireland is no longer part of the EU.

How these new rules affect you depends on your nationality and if you were
already a cross border worker before 1 January 2021.

##  Who can live in Ireland and work in Northern Ireland?

Irish and British citizens can continue to live and work on both sides of the
border. This is because Ireland and the UK are part of the [ Common Travel
Area ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/common-travel-area-
between-ireland-and-the-uk/) , which gives Irish and British citizens the
right to live and access services in both countries.

###  EEA and Swiss citizens

Different rules apply depending on if you were already a cross border worker
before 1 January 2021

####  1\. You were working in Northern Ireland and living in Ireland before 1
January 2021

If you were living in Ireland and working in Northern Ireland before 1 January
2021, you needed a [ Frontier Worker Permit ](https://www.gov.uk/frontier-
worker-permit) to continue working there after 1 July 2021. There is no fee to
apply for the permit.

You can qualify for a Frontier Worker Permit if you meet **all** of the
following:

  * You are a citizen of the EU, Switzerland, Norway, Iceland or Lichtenstein 
  * You live in Ireland (or another country outside the UK) 
  * You started working (including self-employment) in the UK before 1 January 2021 

You must have spent less than 180 days in the UK in any 12 month period you
were working there. If you have spent more time in the UK than 180 days, you
can still qualify if you have returned to Ireland at least once every 6
months, or twice in 12 months.

You may qualify for the Permit if you stopped working in the UK but **retained
your worker status** . You can keep your worker status if you stopped working
because:

  * You had an illness or an accident. 
  * You became involuntarily unemployed. You must have registered as a jobseeker and have proof that you were looking for work in the UK while you were out of work. You can keep your worker status for: 
    * 6 months if you worked in the UK for less than one year 
    * As long as you were continuing to look for work, if you worked in the UK for a year or more 
  * You became voluntarily unemployed and started vocational training related to the work you were doing. 
  * You were pregnant or gave birth. If you are on maternity or paternity leave, you are still classed as working. If you stopped working because you had a child you can keep your worker status for up to one year. After this you can keep your worker status by registering as unemployed and looking for work. 

You can read about [ how to apply for the Frontier Worker Permit
](https://www.gov.uk/frontier-worker-permit) on gov.uk.

If you are an Irish citizen, you do not need to apply for a Frontier Worker
Permit but you can choose to if you want.

####  2\. You were not living in Ireland and working in Northern Ireland
before 1 January 2021

You do not qualify for the Frontier Worker Permit. If you want to work in
Northern Ireland (or another part in the UK), you should apply for permission
to work in the UK through the [ UK points based immigration scheme
](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/the-uks-points-based-immigration-system-
information-for-eu-citizens) .

####  3\. You live in Northern Ireland and work in Ireland

If you lived in Northern Ireland (or another part of the UK) before the end of
2020, you must apply to continue to live there through the [ EU Settlement
Scheme ](https://www.gov.uk/settled-status-eu-citizens-families) . You have a
right to work in Ireland.

**New residents from 1 January 2021** \- If you plan to move to Northern
Ireland and work there, or to live in Northern Ireland and work in Ireland,
you must apply for UK residence through the [ Points Based Immigration System
](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/the-uks-points-based-immigration-system-
information-for-eu-citizens) .

###  Non-EEA citizens

If you are from outside the EEA, you have to get permission to live in Ireland
and permission to enter and work in the UK. This means you have to satisfy
both country’s immigration conditions.

##  Non-EEA family members

People from outside the EEA, UK and Switzerland need permission to live in
Ireland.

###  Family members of UK citizens

If your family lived with you in Ireland before 1 January 2021 and had an IRP
Card with Stamp 4EU FAM (as family members of EU citizens), they were required
to exchange their IRP Card before 30 June 2022.

Non-EEA family members of UK citizens who move to Ireland from 1 January 2021
must apply for a visa or preclearance through a [ new immigration scheme
](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/residence-rules-UK-
citizens#l5a1aa) .

###  Family members of Irish citizens

If your spouse or partner is from outside the EEA, UK and Switzerland, they
have to [ apply for residence ](https://www.migrantproject.ie/immigration-
information/residency-information-for-non-eu-family-members-of-irish-
citizens/) . They may also have to apply for a [ visa to enter Ireland
](/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-
ireland/) .

##  Tax

If you are living in Ireland and working in Northern Ireland, your tax and
national insurance (this is like PRSI in Ireland) is deducted from your pay.

You also have to make an annual self-assessment to Revenue in Ireland. Ireland
and the UK have a double taxation agreement, which means that you will get a
credit for the tax that you already paid in the UK. This makes sure that you
won’t have to pay tax twice. But you may have to pay extra tax in Ireland
based on the difference in the tax rates between the two countries, and also
based on the earnings of your spouse if you have one.

You should apply for [ Transborder Workers’ Relief
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/income-and-employment/trans-border-workers-relief/index.aspx) in
Ireland.

You may be entitled to [ tax credits in the UK ](https://www.gov.uk/tax-
credits-if-moving-country-or-travelling/crossborder-workers) based on how much
income you have. UK tax credits is a payment made to workers on low income,
and is different to tax credits in Ireland, which are used to calculate how
much tax you have to pay.

##  Social welfare

In general, the country you work in is responsible for paying social welfare
payments. For example, if you are working in Northern Ireland and your family
lives in Ireland, the UK pays [ Child Benefit
](https://www.nidirect.gov.uk/articles/how-claim-benefit) . But if the rate of
Child Benefit you get in the UK is less than [ Child Benefit in Ireland
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) , you can apply to
get your payment topped up by Ireland.

[ Ireland and the UK have agreed ](https://www.dfa.ie/brexit/getting-ireland-
brexit-ready/brexit-and-you/common-travel-area/) to continue paying social
welfare to cross border workers and to recognise insurance contributions
(national insurance or PRSI) paid in the other country, in the same way as
when the UK was part of the EU.

###  Family benefits

Family benefits include [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/child-benefit/) and [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/) in Ireland, and [ Child
Tax Credit ](https://www.gov.uk/child-tax-credit) in the UK.

The table below explains how payments are made where one or more spouse or
partner lives in Ireland and has a spouse or partner and children **in
Ireland** .

**Location of work** |  **Who pays child benefit** |  **Other possible entitlements**  
---|---|---  
One person in a couple works in Northern Ireland and the other person does not work  |  UK pays Child Benefit  |  Means-tested Child Tax Credit in UK   
One person in a couple works in Northern Ireland and the other person works in Ireland  |  Ireland pays Child Benefit  |  Means-tested Working Family Payment in Ireland   
Both work in Northern Ireland  |  UK pays Child Benefit  |  Means-tested Child Tax Credit in UK  Top-up of Child Benefit in Ireland   
  
###  Unemployment payments

If you are lose your job completely you claim benefits from the country where
you live. But if you have reduced hours or you are working casually, you apply
for benefits in the country where you work.

For example, if you are made redundant from your job in Northern Ireland and
you live in Ireland, you claim [ Jobseeker’s Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker’s Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) from your local
INTREO office in Ireland.

If your job in Northern Ireland reduces your hours, you must apply for
benefits in Northern Ireland.

###  Sickness and disability

If you become sick and cannot work temporarily, your employer in Northern
Ireland should pay you [ Statutory Sick Pay (SSP)
](https://www.gov.uk/statutory-sick-pay) for up to 28 weeks. If this is your
only income, you can apply for [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) in Ireland
to top up this payment.

You can claim [ Employment and Support Allowance
](https://www.gov.uk/employment-support-allowance) if you are unable to work
due to illness or disability and your SSP has finished or you are not entitled
to SSP.

If you have to give up your job because of a sickness or disability, you may
be entitled to [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/invalidity-pension/) in Ireland. This is based on your PRSI
contributions and you can only apply for it if you have worked in Ireland some
time in your life. If you have only worked in Ireland for a short period, you
will only be able to get a small amount of Invalidity Pension.

[ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/) is a payment for people who have a disability or illness that
substantially restricts them from doing work that would be suitable for a
person of their age, experience and qualifications. Disability Allowance is
means tested and paid to people who are [ habitually resident ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) in Ireland.

###  Maternity and paternity payments and services

If you are working in Northern Ireland, you can choose to have your baby there
and access healthcare services. This does not apply to you if only your
partner (the partner who is not pregnant) works in NI.

The country you work in is responsible for your Maternity Benefit. If you are
working in NI, you should apply for [ Statutory Maternity Pay
](https://www.gov.uk/maternity-pay-leave) there. If your partner is working in
Northern Ireland, they can claim [ Paternity Pay
](https://www.gov.uk/paternity-pay-leave) through their employer. If your
partner is working in Ireland they can claim [ paternity and parental benefits
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/payments-to-families-and-children/)
there.

###  Pensions

Contributions made in Northern Ireland and Ireland can be combined when you
are applying for your pension. You may also be entitled to a pension from both
countries.

If you have made contributions in both Ireland and Northern Ireland (or other
parts of the UK, or other parts of the EEA) you can apply to the pension
office in the country where you live when you reach pension age.

##  Further information

More information about cross-border working and the Frontier Worker Permit is
available from:

  * [ Border People ](https://borderpeople.info/)
  * [ Gov.uk ](https://www.gov.uk/frontier-worker-permit)

You can read about [ social welfare payment for EU citizens ](/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-welfare/) in
Ireland.

_**Page edited:** 25 August 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/cross-border-
workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Cross%20border%20workers%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/cross-border-
workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/cross-border-
workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Cross%20border%20workers%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/cross-border-
workers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Social workers in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/social-work-services/)

Social work services are provided through the public health services. The
Health Service Executive (HSE) is obliged to provide certain social work
services. Find out more.

1579.7671

  * [ _Studying in the UK including Northern Ireland_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/studying-abroad/studying-in-the-uk-including-northern-ireland/)

Many people leave to study in Northern Ireland and elsewhere in the UK where
there are different application procedures and fees.

1376.446

  * [ _Cross-Border Healthcare Directive_ ](/en/health/eu-healthcare/cross-border-directive/)

If you are entitled to public health services in Ireland, you may opt to
access those services in another member state of the European Union or
European Economic Area.

1216.7991

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

