**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ Standards and accountability
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-
accountability/) > Unconstitutional legislation

#  Unconstitutional legislation

  * Introduction 
  * Presidential power 
  * Judicial proceedings 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

Under Article 15 of the [ Constitution of Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) , the [ Oireachtas
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/houses_of_the_oireachtas/)
must not enact a law which is incompatible with the Constitution. Also, if a
law or part of a law is incompatible with the Constitution, the law or part of
it is invalid. A law passed by the Oireachtas is presumed to be constitutional
until it is proven not to be.  

##  Presidential power

Legislation starts life as a Bill which is passed by both Houses of the
Oireachtas. Every Bill must be signed by the [ Irish President
](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/president-introduction-
to-the-president-of-ireland/) before it can become law. As soon as a Bill has
been passed by both Houses of the Oireachtas, it is presented to the President
for signature.

Before signing the Bill, the President has the power under Article 26 of the
Constitution to refer the bill to the [ Supreme Court ](/en/justice/courts-
system/supreme-court/) when there is doubt as to whether it is constitutional.
The President must first consult with the Council of State but the decision to
refer the Bill is the President's alone.

The Supreme Court must decide whether or not the Bill conflicts with the
Constitution. If the Supreme Court holds that the Bill is unconstitutional,
the President cannot sign it into law. Under Article 34 of the Constitution,
if a Bill has been referred by the President and the Supreme Court decides
that the Bill is compatible with the Constitution, the constitutionality of
this legislation cannot be challenged subsequently.

##  Judicial proceedings

The [ High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) has the power or
_jurisdiction_ to cancel any law or part of any law that is repugnant to the
Constitution. This means that if you believe that a law breaches the
Constitution or your fundamental rights, you may bring proceedings in the High
Court. The constitutionality of an Act that has not yet commenced may be
challenged where an order commencing it could be made at any time. Notice of
the proceedings must be served on the [ Attorney General ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-attorney-general/) .

In order to challenge the constitutionality of legislation, you must show that
you have "sufficient interest" in the proceedings, that is, that the
legislation affects you in some real way. You must also show that you have an
arguable case, that is, that your case has grounds.

The High Court will examine the legislation in question and decide whether or
not it conflicts with the Constitution. If it decides that the legislation
does conflict with the Constitution, it may annul or cancel the law or the
part of it that is unconstitutional.

The High Courtâ€™s decision may be appealed to the Court of Appeal or the
Supreme Court.

##  How to apply

If you wish to begin judicial proceedings, you should contact a [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) who will in turn brief a [ barrister
](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) to draft the papers for the case. It is
also possible for you to represent yourself if you wish to keep your legal
costs down.

There is no fixed rate of charges for legal fees so you should obtain some
quotes before deciding on legal representation. Your solicitor must advise you
in writing of the [ fees you will be charged ](/en/justice/civil-law/legal-
fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/) for their services. If it is not possible to
give you a definite sum, they must estimate a sum or at the very least
describe the basis upon which charges or fees will be calculated.

_**Page edited:** 24 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/unconstitutional-
legislation-and-decisions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Unconstitutional%20legislation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/unconstitutional-
legislation-and-decisions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/unconstitutional-
legislation-and-decisions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Unconstitutional%20legislation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/unconstitutional-
legislation-and-decisions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Legislation_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/legislation/)

This document describes how laws are made by the Oireachtas (the Irish
parliament).

1306.4917

  * [ _Seat belts and the law_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-safety/seatbelts-when-motoring-in-ireland/)

There is a legal obligation in Ireland to be restrained when motoring and this
applies to drivers and passengers. Overview of the law currently in place
regarding the wearing of seatbelts and child restraints in motor vehicles.

1173.0193

  * [ _Other EU data protection legislation_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/legislation-relating-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation/)

Some uses of personal data fall outside the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and are governed by separate pieces of legislation.

1080.6133

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

