**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ National government ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/national-government/) > Civil Service

#  Civil Service

  * Introduction 
  * What does the civil service do? 
  * Working for the civil service 
  * Civil servants and public servants 
  * Further information and contacts 

##  Introduction

The civil service carries out the work of Government and delivers public
services. Civil servants are the permanent staff of departments of state, but
they may also work for other public bodies.

The [ Constitution of Ireland ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) does not mention the civil service
but it is vital to the functioning of the state.

The [ Civil Service Code of Standards and Behaviour (pdf)
](https://www.sipo.ie/acts-and-codes/codes-of-conduct/civil-servants/Civil-
Service-Code-of-Standards.pdf) says that the mission of the civil service is
the achievement of an excellent service for the Government and the other
institutions of State, as well as for the public as citizens and users of
public services.

###  Recruitment to the civil and public service

[ The Public Appointments Service ](http://www.publicjobs.ie/publicjobs/)
provides recruitment, assessment and selection services for the civil service.
They also provide recruitment and consultancy services to local authorities,
the Health Service Executive , An Garda Síochána and other public bodies.

The Commission for Public Service Appointments is a separate body. The
Commission sets standards, which it publishes as [ codes of practice
](https://www.cpsa.ie/en/collection/8c53f-code-of-practice/) , for recruitment
and selection to the civil service, An Garda Síochána and a number of public
service bodies, including the Health Service Executive.

##  What does the civil service do?

The civil service has three main functions:

  * It advises the Government on the implementation of policy and is responsible for implementing agreed policy 
  * It helps prepare and draft new legislation and 
  * It helps the Government to run the country according to the legislation passed by the Oireachtas. 

Each [ Department of State ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/national-government/departments-of-state/) has a permanent staff
consisting of administrative, professional, specialist and technical
employees. The head civil servant of each Department is the Secretary General,
who is recommended by the Minister for that Department and appointed for a
period of 7 years by the Government.

Below the Secretary General, there are a number of Assistant Secretaries, who
are each responsible for specific areas of work in the Department. Below the
Assistant Secretaries, there are many officials at varying levels of seniority
who are [ graded according to their seniority
](https://www.publicjobs.ie/en/information-hub/civil-service-career-path) .

##  Working for the civil service

The Public Appointments Service provides recruitment, assessment and selection
services for the civil service. They also provide recruitment and consultancy
services to local authorities, the Health Service Executive , An Garda
Síochána and other public bodies. Civil and public service jobs are advertised
on [ publicjobs.ie ](https://www.publicjobs.ie/en/information-hub/civil-
service-career-path) .

The [ Commission for Public Service Appointments
](https://www.cpsa.ie/en/collection/8c53f-code-of-practice/) sets standards,
which it publishes as codes of practice, for recruitment and selection to the
civil service, An Garda Síochána and a number of public service bodies,
including the Health Service Executive.

##  Civil servants and public servants

Civil servants are the branch of the public service that works directly for
the Government in government departments or in certain state agencies which
carry out functions on behalf of the State, but which are independent of
Government. For example, those who fall work in the Central Bank of Ireland
and the Revenue Commissioners are civil servants of the State.

All civil servants are also public servants. However, the public service
covers a much broader range of professions which are paid for by the State.
This includes many teachers, doctors, nurses, gardaí and employees of other
agencies that provide state services to the public.

##  Further information and contacts

###  Public Appointments Service

Chapter House  
26-30 Abbey Street Upper  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 858 7400

**Locall:** 1890 449 999

**Fax:** \+ 353 1 858 7500

**Homepage:** [ http://www.publicjobs.ie/ ](http://www.publicjobs.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@publicjobs.ie ](mailto:info@publicjobs.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 March 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-civil-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Civil%20Service&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-civil-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-civil-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Civil%20Service&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-civil-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1084.6672

  * [ _Civil partnership and inheritance_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-partnerships/civil-partnership-and-inheritance/)

This page describes your right to inheritance in a civil partnership.

1056.7246

  * [ _Occupational therapy services_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/occupational-therapy-services/)

Occupational therapy services in Ireland are designed to help people of all
ages achieve the maximum degree of independence in ordinary living.

1026.1522

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

