**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Elections and referendums ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/) > [ Voting ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/) > Proportional representation

#  Proportional representation

  * Introduction 
  * Voting in a PR election 
  * How are votes counted in a PR election? 
  * How is the quota calculated? 
  * What happens to surplus votes? 
  * How are candidates eliminated? 
  * Recouping election costs 
  * Recounts 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

When you vote in an election in Ireland, you are asked to give your vote in
order of preference. This is because Ireland uses an electoral system called
_proportional representation with a single transferrable vote_ (PR–STV, or PR
for short).

The names of candidates appear in alphabetical order on the ballot paper,
along with their photographs and their party emblem (if they wish).

You vote by writing “1” opposite your first choice candidate, “2” opposite
your second choice, “3” opposite your third choice, and so on.

You can stop after indicating your first choice candidate or you can continue
to give a preferential vote to as many candidates on the ballot paper as you
wish.

When you vote with more than one preference, you are instructing the r
_eturning officer_ (the person responsible for the counting of votes) that if
your preferred candidate is eliminated, or elected with a surplus of votes,
you want your vote to be transferred to your second choice candidate.

PR is used in all elections in Ireland, including:

  * [ General elections ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/the-general-election/)
  * [ Local elections ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/local-elections/)
  * [ European elections ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/european-elections/)
  * [ Presidential elections ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/presidential-election/)

##  Voting in a PR election

At the polling station on election day, you will be given a stamped ballot
paper. The returning officer may ask to see some identification or a polling
card.

You cast your vote in a private space.

The election candidates will be listed alphabetically alongside their picture,
the name of their party (if they belong to a political party) and their party
emblem (in some cases). You vote by placing the number of your choice next to
the candidate or candidates that you have chosen.

You can vote for as many or as few of the candidates as you wish.

If you want to vote for one candidate only, you should mark the number “1” in
the box next to the candidate’s name. You should **not** tick or mark the box
with an X.

Pencils will be provided, but you can bring your own pen or pencil if you
wish.

When you have voted you should fold your ballot paper so your vote is not
visible and put the folded ballot paper into the ballot box.

If you make a mistake on your ballot paper, the returning officer may give you
another ballot paper. This is at the discretion of the returning officer. If
you have already posted your ballot in the ballot box, the returning officer
cannot give you another ballot paper.

###  Spoiled votes

Ballot papers that cannot be counted are called _spoiled votes_ . A ballot
papers may be spoiled if:

  * The ballot paper was left blank 
  * The voter ticked or otherwise marked their preferred candidate or candidates, rather than numbering them 
  * The writing on the ballot paper could not be understood 
  * The ballot paper did not have the number “1” or the word “one” next to any candidate 
  * The ballot paper was not stamped by the returning officer 
  * The voter wrote their name or identified themselves in some way 
  * The order of preference was not clear (for example, the voter wrote “3” next to 2 different candidates) 
  * The voter deliberately spoiled their paper as a protest 

##  How are votes counted in a PR election?

When polling is over, all the ballot boxes are taken to a central counting
place for each constituency. The count starts at 9am on the day after polling
day. Each ballot box is opened separately and the ballot papers in each box
are counted.

The total number is compared with the total number of ballot papers issued for
that box - this is done to check that ballot papers have not been put into or
taken out of the box since the poll closed.

The ballot papers are then sorted into piles of ballot papers for each
candidate.

The ballot papers are counted and sorted, and spoiled papers are rejected.

The **total valid poll** is the total number of votes minus the number of
spoiled papers.

The count then takes place over a number of rounds. As candidates are elected
or eliminated, the second, third (or lower) preference votes on that
candidate’s ballot paper are counted.

Counting continues until all the seats have been filled.

##  How is the quota calculated?

To be elected, a candidate must generally reach _the quota_ for the
constituency. The last seat can be filled by a candidate who did not reach the
quota if all the other candidates have been elected or eliminated.

The quota is calculated by dividing the total valid poll by 1 more than the
number of available seats (if there is a number to carry over, it is ignored),
and then adding 1.

**For example,** in a 4-seat constituency with a total valid poll of 25,000,
the quota is:

25,000 ( _the total valid poll_ ) divided by 5 ( _1 more than the number of
seats_ ), which is 5,000. Then add 1. The quota is 5,001.

##  What happens to surplus votes?

If a candidate receives **more than the quota** , their _surplus_ ballot
papers are transferred to the remaining candidates.

The surplus is transferred in proportion to how many second (or lower)
preferences the other candidates received in the elected candidate’s vote. If
the second preference candidate on any ballot is either already elected or has
been eliminated, then the third preference is used, and so on.

If a candidate is elected at the first count, then all their votes are used to
calculate the proportion of surplus that will be given to each candidate.

Where a candidate reaches the quota **after the first count** , only the
ballot papers that brought them over the quota are examined (the votes that
were transferred from the previous count).

If 2 or more candidates are elected at the same time, then the surplus of the
candidate with the largest vote is distributed first.

##  How are candidates eliminated?

If nobody reaches the quota after a round of counting, then the candidate with
the fewest number of votes is eliminated, and all their votes are distributed.

More than one candidate can be eliminated after a round of voting if it is
clear that they cannot be elected, and they cannot qualify to have their
election expenses repaid.

##  Recouping election costs

Candidates can qualify for recoupment (repayment) of their election expenses
(up to a maximum of €8,700 at a Dáil election), if they:

  * Are elected 
  * Are not elected, but their total number of votes **exceeds** one quarter of the quota 

There are extra count rules to give candidates every chance of reaching this
vote threshold.

At a bye-election, the threshold is calculated differently to ensure that the
minimum number of votes needed to qualify for recoupment of election expenses
at a general election and at a [ bye-election ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/by-
elections-in-ireland/) in the same constituency is broadly comparable.

##  Recounts

A recount can be ordered if a candidate asks for one, or if the returning
officer decides that a recount is needed.

A candidate might ask for a recount of a particular count, or round of voting.
This means that the votes that were counted in the last round only are counted
again and corrected if necessary.

A candidate might ask for a total recount, which means that all the votes are
counted as they are at the time of the request. If an error is found, then all
the votes are recounted from the time the mistake happened.

It is possible that candidates that have already been _deemed to be elected_ ,
could have their election overturned because of a recount. A candidate is
deemed to be elected once they reach the quota of votes.

However, once the result is _declared_ , a recount can only happen if it is
ordered by the [ High Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) . A
candidate is declared elected when the total count is complete and the
returning officer has declared the results.

##  Further information

The Department of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government have
published a [ guide to proportional representation (pdf)
](https://www.housing.gov.ie/sites/default/files/publications/files/pr-
stv_guide.pdf) .

###  Franchise Section

Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage

Custom House  
Dublin 1  
D01 W6X0  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 888 2000

**Locall:** 1890 20 20 21

**Email:** [ franchise@housing.gov.ie ](mailto:franchise@housing.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 18 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/proportional-
representation/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Proportional%20representation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/proportional-
representation/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/proportional-
representation/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Proportional%20representation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/proportional-
representation/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Representation in court_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/representation-in-court/)

When do you require legal representation and who represents you in court?

1013.2942

  * [ _Worksheet: Jobseeker's Allowance and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-jobseekers-allowance-and-income-from-work/)

This worksheet can help you find out how part-time work can affect your
Jobseeker's Allowance.

1002.2671

  * [ _Legal representation in criminal cases_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/legal-representation-in-criminal-cases/)

The type of offence you are charged with determines what kind of legal
representation you will need in criminal cases. This page explains the types
of criminal offence and the duties of the defence counsel.

966.5947

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

