**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ European government and law ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/) > [ EU Institutions ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/) > Court of Auditors

#  Court of Auditors

  * Introduction 
  * What does the Court of Auditors do? 
  * Members of the Court of Auditors 
  * Contacts 

##  Introduction

The Court of Auditors audits the accounts and oversees the implementation of
the budgets of the [ institutions of the European Union ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/overview-of-eu-institutions/) . It
aims to improve financial management of EU money and to report to EU citizens
on how EU money is used.

##  What does the Court of Auditors do?

The Court of Auditors audits EU funds and how they are spent. It checks that
funds are raised and used correctly and that EU institutions have accounted
for their spending properly.

It carries out spot checks on EU institutions, EU member states and also
countries that receive EU aid.

It publishes an annual report at the end of each financial year. This is sent
to the other institutions and must be published in the [ Official Journal of
the European Union ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/oj/direct-access.html) .

It reports suspected fraud, corruption or other illegal activity to the [
European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) ](https://ec.europa.eu/anti-fraud/index_en)
.

##  Members of the Court of Auditors

The Court of Auditors is based in Luxembourg and includes one member from each
EU country. Each member state suggests a candidate who is appointed by the [
Council of the European Union ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-
government/eu-institutions/council-of-the-european-union/) in consultation
with the [ European Parliament ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-
government/eu-institutions/european-parliament/) for a renewable term of 6
years

Members of the Court of Auditors are independent and have experience in the
field of audit of public finances. The court members elect their president for
a term of 3 years.  

##  Contacts

###  European Court of Auditors (HQ)

12 Rue Alcide De Gasperi  
L-1615  
Luxembourg

**Tel:** 00 352 4398 1

**Fax:** 00 352 4393 42

**Homepage:** [ https://www.eca.europa.eu/ ](https://www.eca.europa.eu/)

_**Page edited:** 18 February 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/court-of-
auditors/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Court%20of%20Auditors&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/court-of-
auditors/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/court-of-
auditors/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Court%20of%20Auditors&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/court-of-
auditors/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/)

The Court of Justice of the European Union ensures that European law is
interpreted and applied in each member state. Find out about the other
important functions of this court.

3149.584

  * [ _Council of the European Union_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/council-of-the-european-union/)

The Council of the European Union consists of one government minister from
every member state. The Council is part of the law making process in the
European Union.

2448.0957

  * [ _Main institutions of the Irish State_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/main-institutions-of-the-state/)

Power in Ireland is divided between the legislature, the executive and the
judiciary. This document describes how these powers are used and introduces
the institutions at the heart of power in the State.

2036.9438

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

