**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Charities ](/en/government-in-ireland/charities/) > Charities
Regulatory Authority

#  Charities Regulatory Authority

  * What is the Charities Regulator? 
  * Register of charitable organisations 
  * Investigations 
  * Raising a concern about a charity 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is the Charities Regulator?

The [ Charities Regulatory Authority (Charities Regulator)
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en) is the statutory body responsible for
regulating charitable organisations in Ireland. It maintains a public register
of charities and monitors their compliance with the [ Charities Act 2009
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2009/act/6/enacted/en/html) , which sets
out a charity's legal obligations for operating in Ireland.  

The Charities Regulator’s other functions include:

  * Increasing public trust in how charities are run 
  * Encouraging trustees to comply with their duties 
  * Holding charities accountable to their donors, beneficiaries and the public 
  * Investigating charities in accordance with the Charities Act 2009 
  * Encouraging better management of charities by providing information and advice, including guidelines, codes of conduct and template constitutional documents 

You can read more about charities in our document [ 'What is a charity?’
](/en/government-in-ireland/charities/what-is-a-charity/) .

##  Register of charitable organisations

The Charities Regulator maintains a register of charities that are active in
Ireland. It is an offence for a charitable organisation to carry out
activities if it is not registered with the Charities Regulator.

Being registered with the Charities Regulator is separate from being granted a
charitable tax exemption. A charity must be registered with the Charities
Regulator before they can apply for a charitable tax exemption. The Revenue
Commissioners decide if an organisation is a charity for tax purposes and
whether it qualifies for a tax exemption. There is [ a list of charitable
bodies on the Charities Regulator website
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-the-public/search-the-
register-of-charities) .

**What the Regulator needs to register a charity**

Organisations that want to carry out charitable activities must register with
the Regulator. They must provide information about their organisation
including where it operates, what it does and who the trustees are. They must
also provide information about the organisation’s income and fundraising
activities, including:

  * Bank account details 
  * How they fundraise 
  * Details of any property they are using 
  * A business plan, including: 
    * A short history of the organisation 
    * A description of who will donate and who will benefit 
    * A summary of the operational plan 
    * Detailed financial projections 
    * A summary of the risks they have identified 

Each organisation must provide a copy of its constitution or governing
documents. Organisations who work with vulnerable people and children must
also give details of the risk assessment procedures, safety checks and
safeguards they have in place.

**Approved applications**

If the Regulator approves an organisation’s application, it awards them
charitable status, assigns them a Registered Charity Number and lists them as
a charity on the public register. The public register lists the charity’s:

  * Name 
  * Addresses 
  * Trustees’ names 
  * Objectives (why the charity has been set up and what it hopes to achieve) 
  * Registration number 
  * Financial records, including gross income and total expenditure 

You can [ search the charities register on charitiesregister.ie
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-the-public/search-the-
register-of-charities) .

**Refusals**

If the Charities Regulator refuses an organisation’s application to be
registered as a charity, it must tell the organisation why its application was
refused and that it can appeal the decision, see ‘Appeals’ below.

The Regulator can refuse to register an organisation for a number of reasons,
including for its choice of name. For example, they may refuse an organisation
if its name is:

  * Offensive 
  * The same as, or similar to, another charity 
  * Designed to mislead the public about its purposes or activities 
  * Likely to make the public believe it is connected with the Government, a local authority or anyone it is not connected with 

Once a charity is registered, its name can only be changed with the consent of
the Regulator.

**Removing a charity from the register**

The Charities Regulator must remove organisations from the register in certain
circumstances, for example, if a charity changes its name without the
Regulator’s consent, or if the Regulator thinks a charity is promoting
unlawful or immoral activities. There will be a statement in the register
explaining why they have been removed.

If a charity is removed from the register they must wait at least a year
before applying to be registered again.

**Appeals**

If the Regulator refuses an organisation’s application to be registered as a
charity, the organisation can appeal to the Charity Appeals Tribunal. The
appeal application must be made within 21 days of receiving written notice of
the refusal from the Regulator. The Regulator must accept the decision of the
Tribunal.

##  Investigations

The Regulator can appoint an inspector to investigate a charity. The charity
and its trustees must fully co-operate with an investigation and give the
inspector all the relevant accounts and documents.

The inspector has the power to make people co-operate with an investigation,
including people not directly connected with the charity. The inspector can
also apply to the District Court for a warrant to enter and search a charity’s
premises.

Investigators report their findings to the Charities Regulator. The Regulator
may forward the report to other authorities such as the Director of Public
Prosecutions or the Revenue Commissioners, for further investigation. The High
Court will decide whether the charity has violated the Charities Act.

##  Raising a concern about a charity

If you are concerned about a charity or its activities, you can [ raise a
concern with the Charities Regulator
](https://www.charitiesregulatoryauthority.ie/en/cra/pages/raise_a_concern_about_a_charity)
. They will deal with concerns relating to:

  * Risk of significant loss or damage to a charity 
  * Charity trustees who have breached their duties 
  * Misconduct by those in control of a charity 
  * If a charity does not meet the legal requirements to be a charity 

Concerns about a charity that should not be raised with the Charities
Regulator include:

  * Matters that do not relate to charity law – such as employment issues 
  * Criminal activity – this should be reported to An Garda Síochána 
  * Complaints related to services provided by the charity – these should be raised with the charity 
  * Disputes between charity trustees – these should be resolved internally 

You can raise a concern by completing this [ online concerns form
](https://portal.charitiesregulator.ie/concerns) . When processing your
concern, the Regulator acts in accordance with its [ concerns policy (pdf)
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/media/1737/concerns-policy.pdf) .

##  Where to apply

###  Charities Regulatory Authority

3 George's Dock  
IFSC  
Dublin 1  
D01 X5X0

**Opening Hours:** Phone line: Monday - Friday 10.00am - 5.00pm

**Tel:** 353 (0)1 633 1500

**Email:** [ info@charitiesregulator.ie ](mailto:info@charitiesregulator.ie)

_**Page edited:** 8 November 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/charities/charities-regulatory-
authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Charities%20Regulatory%20Authority&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/charities/charities-regulatory-
authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/charities/charities-regulatory-
authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Charities%20Regulatory%20Authority&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/charities/charities-regulatory-
authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Gambling Regulatory Authority of Ireland_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/gambling-regulatory-authority/)

The Gambling Regulatory Authority will be the new body responsible for the
regulation of the gambling industry.

1793.3607

  * [ _Legal Services Regulatory Authority_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/)

Information about the Legal Services Regulatory Authority (LSRA), the State
body responsible for the regulation of legal practitioners (solicitors and
barristers) in Ireland.

1611.5566

  * [ _The Pensions Authority_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/the-pensions-authority/)

The Pensions Authority is the regulatory body for Occupational Pension Schemes
and Personal Retirement Savings Accounts (PRSAs).

1091.6426

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

