**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ Government records and statistics
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/government-records-and-
statistics/) > National Archives of Ireland

#  National Archives of Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * What does the National Archives do? 
  * Using the National Archives 
  * Researching your family tree 
  * Further Information and Contacts 

##  Introduction

The National Archives of Ireland is where researchers and members of the
public can view original documents and records from departments of state, the
courts, public bodies as well as many private collections.

The documents held in the Archives help to provide an understanding of the
social, economic and political history of Ireland. The National Archives was
formed in 1988, when the Public Record Office (founded 1867, formerly at the
Four Courts) and the State Paper Office (founded 1702, formerly at Dublin
Castle) were merged to create a single institution.

##  What does the National Archives do?

The functions of the National Archives include the following:

  * The preservation, restoration, arrangement and description of archives 
  * The preparation of guides, lists, indexes and other finding aids to archives 
  * Making archives available for public inspection 
  * Making and providing copies of archives 
  * The provision of educational services relating to archives 

Many of the archives held by the Public Record Office of Ireland before 1922
were destroyed by fire and explosion at the beginning of the Irish Civil War
in June 1922. Because of this, the archives that are now held by the National
Archives date mainly from the 19th and 20th centuries, although some date back
as far as the 13th century.  

##  Using the National Archives

You can search for records online or in person. The National Archives holds
millions of records and you should read about [ how it organises its catalogue
](https://www.nationalarchives.ie/historical-records/getting-started-with-
archival-research/) on the National Archives website before visiting. You can
also read [ research guides ](https://www.nationalarchives.ie/historical-
records/research-guides-sources/) , which contain information on specific
research topics.

###  Online catalogue

You can search for a record using the National Archives’ online catalogue, but
not all records are listed online so you may need to use the hard copy
catalogue which is available in person at the reading room.

###  In person

Documents cannot be removed from the National Archives building, but you can
inspect them in the Reading Room. The Reading Room is open to all members of
the public, although you will need to apply for a Reader’s Ticket when you
arrive.

Currently it is necessary to book a time in advance. Reader's tickets are free
and last for three years. You can apply for a Reader’s Ticket on your first
visit. You should bring:

  * A photo ID, such as a driver’s license or passport 
  * Proof of your address, such as a utility bill 

In order to look at the archives you will have to sign the ‘Rules for Readers’
which are written to provide a comfortable working environment for readers and
to keep the archives safe.

If are interested in an archive that is held in off-site storage you should [
order it in advance ](https://www.nationalarchives.ie/visit-us/ordering-
archives-in-advance/) . You will need to know the correct reference code and
place the order at least 3 days before your visit. You cannot advance order
archives that are held onsite.

###  Getting copies of archives

[ Copies of the archives ](https://www.nationalarchives.ie/visit-us/obtain-
copies-of-archives/) are available at the National Archives. These are
generally in the form of photocopies, copies from microforms (small-scale
images of the original document) or copies from digital images.

You are not able to make copies of the archives yourself, although if you ask
for permission from the Archivist on Duty you may be able to take digital
photographs for your personal use. You can order copies in the Reading Room by
e-mail or through the post. You can collect them or have them posted to your
address. The National Archive provides a [ summary of the fees
](https://www.nationalarchives.ie/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Summary-of-
fees.pdf) for copies on their website.

###  Other archive collections

The archives of the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces are not
housed at the National Archives in Bishop Street but at the [ Military
Archives ](http://www.military.ie/info-centre/military-archives) in Cathal
Brugha Barracks, Rathmines, Dublin 6. Likewise, the [ archives of the
Geological Survey of Ireland ](http://www.gsi.ie/Services/Archives/) are
housed at the Geological Survey Building, Beggars Bush, Dublin 4. To view
these archives, you are advised to write or phone in advance.

##  Researching your family tree

Many records relevant to Irish family history can be found within the National
Archives. The archive has digitized many relevant records which are freely
available on their [ genealogy website
](https://genealogy.nationalarchives.ie/) . They also provide a free [
genealogy advisory service ](https://www.nationalarchives.ie/genealogy/free-
genealogy-advisory-service/) which is currently available through email. If
you wish to hire a professional researcher to look into your genealogy for
you, you can [ contact an accredited genealogist
](https://accreditedgenealogists.ie/members/) .

Records relating to births, marriages and deaths are not held in the National
Archives. For these, you must contact the General Register Office – see
‘Further Information and Contacts' below.

##  Further Information and Contacts

For details of documents held in the National Archives, contact:  

###  The National Archives of Ireland

Bishop Street  
Dublin 8  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 4072300

**Locall:** 1890 252424

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 4072333

**Homepage:** [ http://www.nationalarchives.ie
](http://www.nationalarchives.ie)

**Email:** [ mail@nationalarchives.ie ](mailto:mail@nationalarchives.ie)

For enquiries relating to registers of births, deaths and marriages, adoption
and stillbirths, contact the General Register Office. If you want to order a
copy of a testamentary record from the National Archives but do not know the
details of the deceased person that are required, you may also make an
application to this address:

###  General Register Office

Government Offices  
Convent Road  
Roscommon  
F42 VX53  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 90 663 2900

**Fax:** +353 90 663 2999

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/gro ](http://www.gov.ie/gro)

**Email:** [ gro@welfare.ie ](mailto:gro@welfare.ie)

For archives of the Department of Defence and the Defence Forces, which are
held in the Military Archives, contact:

###  Military Archives

Cathal Brugha Barracks  
Rathmines  
Dublin 6  
D06 RX00  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 804 6457

**Homepage:** [ https://www.militaryarchives.ie/home
](https://www.militaryarchives.ie/home)

**Email:** [ militaryarchives@defenceforces.ie
](mailto:militaryarchives@defenceforces.ie)

###  Geological Survey of Ireland

Beggars Bush  
Haddington Road  
Dublin 4  
D04 K7X4  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 678 2000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gsi.ie/en-ie/more-on-
us/facilities/Pages/Archives.aspx ](https://www.gsi.ie/en-ie/more-on-
us/facilities/Pages/Archives.aspx)

**Email:** [ gsisales@gsi.ie ](mailto:gsisales@gsi.ie)

_**Page edited:** 21 September 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/government-records-and-statistics/national-
archives-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=National%20Archives%20of%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/government-records-and-statistics/national-
archives-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/government-records-and-statistics/national-
archives-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=National%20Archives%20of%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/government-records-and-statistics/national-
archives-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

2511.3328

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

2273.8557

  * [ _Monitoring and treatment of sex offenders in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/)

This document provides information about the treatment and monitoring of sex
offenders in Ireland. It includes detail on the sex offenders register, post-
release supervision orders, sex offender orders and the treatment of sex
offenders in prison.

2272.181

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

