**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ European government and law ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/) > [ EU Institutions ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/) > Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU)

#  Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)

  * Composition and role of the Court of Justice of the EU 
  * What does the Court of Justice do? 
  * Contacts 

##  Composition and role of the Court of Justice of the EU

The Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) is the judicial institution
of the European Union. This means that it deals with disputes between parties
as the [ courts ](/en/justice/courts-system/courts/) do in Ireland. The CJEU
ensures that European law is interpreted and applied in the same way in every
member state.

It sits in Luxembourg and is composed of the General Court and the Court of
Justice. The General Court has 54 judges and the Court of Justice has 27
judges, one from each member state. In addition to the 27 judges, there are 11
Advocates General who deliver reasoned opinions on cases to assist the Court
of Justice in making its decisions.

The General Court deals with certain categories of cases at first instance.
Decisions of the General Court can be appealed to the Court of Justice.

Judges and Advocates General of the CJEU must have the qualifications to be
appointed to the highest national courts in their member states or they may be
_jurisconsults_ (academic lawyers). Once they are appointed, they may not hold
any other office of an administrative or political nature and they may not
engage in any occupation, paid or unpaid. The Judges and Advocates General are
appointed by joint agreement of the governments of the member states. They
have a renewable term of 6 years.

##  What does the Court of Justice do?

The CJEU upholds the Treaties and ensures that European law is interpreted and
applied in the same way across the EU through various forms of legal action.
These include:

###  Preliminary rulings

To avoid differences of interpretation of EU law by national courts, the
preliminary ruling procedure allows co-operation between national courts and
the Court of Justice. If a case comes before a national court that involves an
interpretation of an EU law and there is a doubt as to how it should be
interpreted, the national court can refer the question to the Court of Justice
to decide. The Court of Justice makes a decision as to how the law should be
interpreted or applied and sends that decision to the national court. The
national court must then apply that decision to the case before it.

###  Enforcing the law

The [ Commission ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-
institutions/european-commission/) or a member state may commence proceedings
at the CJEU to force a member state to comply with EU law. If the CJEU decides
that the member state in question is at fault, the member state must rectify
the situation without delay.

###  Annulling EU law

A member state, the Commission, the [ Council of the European Union
](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/council-of-
the-european-union/) or the [ European Parliament ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-parliament/) may request
the annulment or cancellation of an EU law. This may happen if an EU
institution enacts a law that conflicts with the EU Treaties. If the CJEU
agrees that the disputed law is contrary to the Treaties, it will declare the
law null and void.

Private individuals or companies may also bring proceedings for annulment of
an EU law if they can demonstrate that the disputed law affects them directly
and individually. To bring proceedings for annulment, you should obtain legal
advice and/or representation. You do not need to go through the national
courts first in order to bring proceedings for annulment in the CJEU. If you
lose the case at the CJEU, you may be liable to pay the costs of both sides.
If you succeed, your costs will be paid by the EU and the law will be declared
null and void throughout the EU.

###  Actions for damages

An individual or company who has suffered damage as a result of the action or
inaction of the EU can apply to the CJEU for compensation.

###  Actions for failure to act

Individuals, companies, member states or EU institutions can complain to the
CJEU if an EU institution has failed to make certain decisions.

##  Contacts

###  Court of Justice of the European Union

Boulevard Konrad Adenauer  
2925 Luxembourg

**Tel:** +352 4303 1

**Fax:** +352 4303 2600

**Homepage:** [ http://curia.europa.eu/ ](http://curia.europa.eu/)

**Contact Form:** [ http://curia.europa.eu/jcms/jcms/T5_5133/
](http://curia.europa.eu/jcms/jcms/T5_5133/)

_**Page edited:** 27 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-
justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Court%20of%20Justice%20of%20the%20European%20Union%20%28CJEU%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-
justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-
justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Court%20of%20Justice%20of%20the%20European%20Union%20%28CJEU%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-
justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Council of the European Union_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/council-of-the-european-union/)

The Council of the European Union consists of one government minister from
every member state. The Council is part of the law making process in the
European Union.

3116.394

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

2415.7795

  * [ _Functions and duties of individuals in a court of law_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/functions-and-duties-of-individuals-in-a-court-of-law/)

This document provides an introduction to the section outlining the different
functions and duties of individuals in a court of law.

2404.1743

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

