**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ National government ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/national-government/) > Attorney General

#  Attorney General

  * Who is the Attorney General? 
  * Role and duties 
  * Contact 

##  Who is the Attorney General?

The Attorney General is the adviser to [ the Government
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/national-government/government-of-ireland/) on matters of law and legal
opinion and attends Government meetings. They also represent the public in all
legal proceedings that involve the enforcement of the law or the protection of
public rights.

###  **How is the Attorney General appointed?**

Article 30 of the [ Irish Constitution
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) (Bunreacht na hÉireann) created the
office of the Attorney General.

They are appointed by [ the President
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-
oireachtas/president-introduction-to-the-president-of-ireland/) on the
nomination of the Taoiseach and they leave the office if the Government
changes. Usually, the person appointed is a lawyer who is politically
associated with the party in power.

The Attorney General’s office includes the [ Office of the Parliamentary
Council ](https://www.attorneygeneral.ie/pc/pc.html) and the [ Chief State
Solicitor’s Office ](https://www.attorneygeneral.ie/csso/english/index.htm) .

##  Role and duties

The Attorney General’s roles and duties include:

  * Advising the Government on any constitutional or legal issues that arise in connection with Government meetings 
  * Advising whether proposed [ legislation ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/legislation/) complies with the provisions of the Irish Constitution, Acts and Treaties of the European Union or other international treaties 
  * Giving legal advice on matters that are submitted by the Government, departments and offices and drafting necessary accompanying legal documents 
  * Representing the public in all legal proceedings for the enforcement of law and the assertion or protection of public rights 
  * Representing the State in legal proceedings 
  * Directing the coroner to hold [ an inquest ](/en/death/sudden-or-unexplained-death/inquests-and-inquest-reports/) if the circumstances of someone’s death make it advisable 

####  Guidelines for legal proceedings by the State

When the State engages in legal proceedings, a set of 15 guiding principles
apply to ensure that the State acts ethically and with integrity. These were
created by the Attorney General’s office and are called the [ State Litigation
Principles (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/261411/d915cfb8-2344-48a0-ae06-0f3c83216847.pdf#page=null)
.

##  Contact

###  Chief State Solicitor's Office

Osmond House  
Little Ship Street  
Dublin  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 4176100

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 4176299

**Email:** [ contact@csso.gov.ie ](mailto:contact@csso.gov.ie)

###  Office of the Attorney General

Government Buildings  
Upper Merrion Street  
Dublin  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6314000

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6761806

**Homepage:** [ http://www.attorneygeneral.ie ](http://www.attorneygeneral.ie)

**Email:** [ info@ag.irlgov.ie ](mailto:info@ag.irlgov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 23 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-attorney-
general/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Attorney%20General&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-attorney-
general/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-attorney-
general/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Attorney%20General&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-attorney-
general/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Overview of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/overview-of-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document outlines the main elements of the GDPR and links to further
information about it.

1500.5852

  * [ _PPS numbers for returning Irish emigrants and their families_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-and-families/)

Find your existing PPS number or apply for a new PPS number when returning
home to Ireland. You can also apply for a PPS number for a child born abroad.

1195.0671

  * [ _Role of the jury_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury/)

The jury fulfils a very important role in the legal system in Ireland. Who are
the jury and why is a jury not required in every case?

1153.71

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

