**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ The Dáil, Seanad and President ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/) > President of Ireland

#  President of Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * The President’s term in office 
  * The functions and powers of the President 
  * The legislative role of the President 
  * Support for the President 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The President of Ireland (Uachtarán na hÉireann) is the head of State, as set
out in [ Articles 12-14
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#part3) of the [
Constitution (Bunreacht na hÉireann) ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) .

The President is elected directly by the people of Ireland and serves a 7 year
term in office. No President can serve more than 2 terms.

This document provides information on the role of the President of Ireland. It
includes detail on:

  * The President’s term in office 
  * The functions and powers of the President 
  * The legislative role of the President 
  * Support for the President 

##  The President’s term in office

###  Inauguration

After a [ presidential election ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-
referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/presidential-election/) , the
candidate who has won becomes President of Ireland by publicly making the
declaration set out in Article 12(8) of the Constitution. If a former or
retiring President is re-elected unopposed, they make the declaration for a
second time. This happened when [ Mary McAleese
](https://www.president.ie/en/the-president/mary-mcaleese) became President
for a second term in 2004.

The President is inaugurated in St Patrick's Hall in [ Dublin Castle
](http://www.dublincastle.ie/) and makes the declaration in the presence of
members of both Houses of the Oireachtas, the judges of the [ Supreme Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/) , the [ Court of Appeal
](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/) and the [ High Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) and other public persons.

###  End of the President’s term

The President’s full term of office is 7 years and no President can serve more
than 2 terms. Under Article 12(3) of the Constitution, a presidential election
must take place by the date on which the current President's term of office
expires but may not take place more than 60 days before this.

However, the President can choose to resign at any time during their term in
office. This happened when [ Mary Robinson ](https://president.ie/en/the-
president/mary-robinson) resigned in 1997.

There are also 2 situations when the President may be removed from office:

  1. Where at least 5 Supreme Court judges decide that the President has become permanently incapacitated. 
  2. Where the President is impeached by either House of the Oireachtas for stated misbehaviour. Stated misbehaviour might include a criminal offence or a misuse of the President's powers. Article 12 (10) of the Constitution sets out the procedures for impeachment. 

If the current President resigns, becomes incapacitated, is removed or dies,
then an election must be held within the following 60 days.

##  The functions and powers of the President

The formal powers and functions of the President are prescribed in the
Constitution.

Many of the powers of the President can only be exercised on the advice of the
Government. For example, the Government must approve all Presidential
communications, messages or addresses, both to the Oireachtas (the Irish
parliament) and to the public.

However, there are a limited number of areas in which the President has
absolute discretion, such as in referring a Bill to the Supreme Court for a
judgment on its constitutionality or in refusing to dissolve Dáil Éireann
(lower house of parliament) on the advice of a Taoiseach (Prime Minister) who
has ceased to retain a majority..

The President's powers include:

###  Representing the people

As a representative of the Irish people, the President makes State visits
abroad and receives other Heads of State on visits to Ireland. The role also
includes receiving the credentials of foreign diplomats accredited to Ireland,
undertaking a wide [ range of public engagements
](https://president.ie/en/diary) , and organising awards such as the [ Gaisce
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/the_president/presidents_award_gaisce.en.html)
and the [ Centenarian Bounty ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/centenarians-bounty/) .

###  Summoning and dissolving the Dáil

[ Article 13 (2) of the Constitution
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#part3) gives the President
the power to summon and dissolve (end) [ Dáil Éireann ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) . Following a [ general
election ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-
elections-and-referendums/the-general-election/) , the President summons the
Dáil on the advice of the Taoiseach (Prime Minister).

The President also has the power to dissolve the Dáil on the advice of the
Taoiseach. If the Taoiseach has the support of a majority in the Dáil, the
President cannot refuse to dissolve it.

###  Making appointments

Under [ Article 13 (1) of the Constitution
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#part3) , the President has
an important role in appointing people to various offices of State. In
addition to appointing the Taoiseach nominated by Dáil Éireann, for instance,
it is the role of the President to appoint the TDs nominated by the Taoiseach
as Government Ministers.

The President also appoints the [ Attorney General ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/national-government/the-attorney-general/) , the
legal adviser to the Government (who is nominated by the Taoiseach) and the [
Comptroller and Auditor General ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/standards-and-accountability/comptroller-and-auditor-general/) , who is
nominated by Dáil Éireann. The Government nominates [ judges
](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) for the various [ courts ](/en/justice/courts-
system/courts/) throughout the State and the President then appoints them.

###  Command of the Defence Forces

The President is Supreme Commander of the Irish [ Defence Forces
](http://www.military.ie/en/home/) . Officers in the Defence Forces hold
commissions from the President.

Under the [ Defence Act 1954
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1954/en/act/pub/0018/index.html) , the
Government exercises military command through the Minister for Defence, who
manages and controls the Defence Forces.

###  Convening the Oireachtas

The President can convene a meeting of either or both Houses of the
Oireachtas, after first consulting with [ the Council of State
](https://president.ie/en/the-president/council-of-state) (for further
information, see ‘Support for the President’ below). This power might be used
in an emergency situation. It has never been exercised to date.

At the meeting of either or both Houses of the Oireachtas, the President may
communicate a message or address on any matter of national or public
importance. The message or address must first be approved by the Government.

##  The legislative role of the President

The President has an important role in enacting Government legislation. These
and other rules on legislation are set out in [ Articles 20-27 of the
Constitution ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#article20) .

###  Signing bills into law

When a [ Bill ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-
oireachtas/legislation/) , a proposal for legislation, has been passed by both
Houses of the Oireachtas, it is presented to the President for signature. It
will only become law when the President has signed it.

In general, the President must sign a Bill on the fifth, sixth or seventh day
after it is presented. However, if [ Seanad Éireann ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/the-seanad/) agrees, the Government may ask
for the Bill to be signed sooner. Once the Bill has been signed, the President
must publish a notice in [ Iris Oifigiúil (the official State gazette)
](http://www.irisoifigiuil.ie/) stating that the Bill has become law.

###  Referring bills to the Supreme Court

Under Article 26 of the Constitution, the President can decide to refer a Bill
to the Supreme Court (within 7 days of receiving it) to determine whether or
not the Bill conflicts with the Constitution. The President must first consult
with the Council of State, but the decision to refer the Bill is the
President's alone.

If the Supreme Court holds that the Bill is [ unconstitutional
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-
accountability/unconstitutional-legislation-and-decisions/) , the President
cannot sign it. However, if the Court holds that the Bill is constitutional,
the President signs the Bill and it becomes law. In this situation, under [
Article 34 of the Constitution
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#part11) , the
constitutionality of this legislation (or of any part of it) cannot be
challenged at a later stage.

The power of referral to the Supreme Court has been used several times – see [
decisions on supremecourt.ie
](http://www.supremecourt.ie/supremecourt/sclibrary3.nsf/pagecurrent/5A270AE31790620C802575EB003DAC2C?opendocument&l=en)
.

###  Constitutional amendments

Before the Constitution can be amended, both Houses of the Oireachtas must
pass a Bill to amend it. The Irish people must then approve the Bill in a [
constitutional referendum ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-
referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/constitutional-referendum-in-
ireland/) . If the Bill is approved in a referendum, the President must then
sign it so that the Constitution can be amended.

###  Additional powers

The President has 2 further powers in relation to legislation, which have
never been exercised to date.

**Proposals of national importance** : Under Article 27 of the Constitution,
the President may refuse to sign a Bill if a majority of the members of the
Seanad and at least one-third of the members of the Dáil petition the
President not to sign it, on the grounds that the Bill contains a proposal of
such national importance that the will of the people should be found out. The
President must consult with the [ Council of State
](https://president.ie/en/the-president/council-of-state) before deciding
whether or not to sign the Bill.

In this situation, if the President decides not to sign the Bill, [ an
ordinary referendum ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-
referenda/national-elections/constitutional-referendum-in-ireland#la4a6f) is
held. To date, no ordinary referendum has taken place.

**Referring Money Bills** : The President also has a power in relation to
possible Money Bills, which are Bills that relate to taxation or to Government
spending.

Under Article 22 of the Constitution, if the Dáil and Seanad disagree about
whether or not a particular Bill is a Money Bill, the Seanad may ask the
President to refer the question to a Committee of Privileges. This is a
special committee appointed by the President, consisting of an equal number of
members of the Dáil and Seanad and a chaired by a Supreme Court judge.

The President must consult with the Council of State before deciding whether
or not to appoint a Committee of Privileges.

##  Support for the President

There are two main institutions that function to support the work of the
President: the Council of State and the Presidential Commission.

###  The Council of State

[ Article 31 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/cons/en/html#part9) of the
Constitution provides for a Council of State, to help and advise the President
when consulted. The Council of State has 3 categories of members:

  * Ex-officio members: these are members by virtue of their office. They are the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste, the Chief Justice, the President of the Court of Appeal, the President of the High Court, the Ceann Comhairle (Chairperson) of Dáil Éireann, the Cathaoirleach (Chairperson) of Seanad Éireann and the Attorney General. 
  * Former office-holders: these include every former President, Taoiseach and Chief Justice who is able and willing to act. 
  * Members appointed by the President: the President can appoint up to 7 members, whose term on the Council of State can last for as long as the President is in office. The President can decide to end the appointment of any of these members. 

The President must consult with the Council of State before exercising certain
functions. For example, they must consult with the Council of State before
convening a meeting of one or both Houses of the Oireachtas. The President
must also consult with the Council of State in order to exercise some of their
powers in relation to legislation.

Read more about the [ Council of State ](https://president.ie/en/the-
president/council-of-state) .  

###  The Presidential Commission

Article 14 of the Constitution provides for a Commission to perform the
functions of the President in certain situations – if the President is absent,
becomes incapacitated, resigns, is removed from office, dies or fails to
perform their functions.

The members of the Presidential Commission are the Chief Justice, the Ceann
Comhairle of the Dáil and the Cathaoirleach of the Seanad. If any member is
unable to act, the President of the Court of Appeal, the Leas (Deputy) Ceann
Comhairle and the Leas (Deputy) Cathaoirleach, respectively, can act as a
member instead. Any 2 of the members can carry out the President’s functions
when required.

The Commission frequently acts when the President is abroad - for example, by
signing Bills into law. It has also appointed members of the Government (on
the nomination of the Taoiseach and after approval by Dáil Éireann). It can
also dissolve Dáil Éireann on the advice of the Taoiseach – this happened in
1992, when the President was abroad.

Read more about the [ Presidential Commission ](https://president.ie/en/the-
president/presidential-commission/) .

##  Further information

There is further information on [ president.ie ](https://president.ie/en)
about the role and functions of the President, including a [ series of FAQs
](https://president.ie/en/about/your-questions-answered) . You can also find
information about the [ current President ](https://president.ie/en/the-
president/michael-d-higgins) and past Presidents.

_**Page edited:** 12 September 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/president-introduction-to-the-president-
of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=President%20of%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/president-introduction-to-the-president-
of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/president-introduction-to-the-president-of-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=President%20of%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/president-introduction-to-the-president-
of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

1964.0662

  * [ _Role of the jury_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury/)

The jury fulfils a very important role in the legal system in Ireland. Who are
the jury and why is a jury not required in every case?

1790.7375

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1764.5872

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

