**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Elections and referendums ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/) > [ Types of elections and referendums
](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-
referendums/) > Referendums on family and care

#  Referendums on family and care

  * What is a referendum? 
  * What was I asked to decide on? 
  * Where can I get more information? 
  * Referendum results 

##  What is a referendum?

A constitutional referendum allows Irish citizens to decide whether or not to
change the wording of the Irish Constitution. [ The Irish Constitution
(Bunreacht na hÉireann) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) is the legal document
that sets out how Ireland should be governed.

On Friday, 8 March 2024, Irish citizens were asked to decide if changes should
be made to Article 41 of the [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) \- see 'Referendum
results' below.

The proposed changes were also called the _Family Amendment_ and the _Care
Amendment_ – for more information see ‘What was I asked to decide on?’ below.

To [ vote in a referendum ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-
referenda/voting/voting-in-a-referendum/) , you must be:

  * An Irish citizen 
  * Aged 18 years or over 
  * Ordinarily resident in Ireland 
  * On the Register of Electors 

##  What was I asked to decide on?

On 8 March 2024, two referendums were held to decide if changes should be made
to the [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/)
. The proposed changes were called:

  * The Family Amendment, and 
  * The Care Amendment 

###  The Family Amendment

The Family Amendment is the 39th Amendment and it concerns the concept of
family in the Constitution.

It was on a white coloured ballot paper.

It deals with Article 41.1.1°and Article 41.3.1° of the Constitution.

Read more about the [ proposed Family Amendment
](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/referendums/referendum-information/what-
are-you-being-asked-to-decide-on/#FamilyAmendment) .

###  The Care Amendment

The Care Amendment is the 40th Amendment and it proposed to delete an existing
part of the Constitution and insert new text about care provided by family
members.

It was on a green coloured ballot paper.

In this amendment there was one vote for two proposed changes. The proposal
involved deleting Article 41.2.1° and Article 41.2.2° and inserting a new
Article.

Find out more about the [ proposed Care Amendment
](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/referendums/referendum-information/what-
are-you-being-asked-to-decide-on/#CareAmendment) .

##  Where can I get more information?

[ The Electoral Commission ](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/) is Ireland’s
independent electoral commission. The Commission must provide impartial and
unbiased information about these referendum proposals.

The Commission does not outline the arguments for and against referendum
proposals. It may clarify and provide information about areas it considers to
be of significant public concern.

You can find information about the [ referendums on family and care on the
Commissions website
](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/referendums/referendum-information/what-
are-you-being-asked-to-decide-on/) .

The Electoral Commission also has easy to read [ booklets about the
referendums on family and care
](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/referendums/referendum-
information/referendum-information-booklets/) . You can also get an [ audio
booklet about the referendum on family and care ](https://vimeo.com/912210092)
.

You can get [ information about the referendums on family and care in Irish
Sign Language (ISL) ](https://vimeo.com/user196176530/isl) .

##  Referendum results

It is the duty of the Referendum Returning Officer to conduct referendums, and
to establish and declare the result of referendums.

You can find the referendum results for the Family Amendment and the Care
Amendment on the [ website of the referendum returning officer
](https://www.referendum.ie/) .

_**Page edited:** 11 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-
referendums/referendum-on-family-and-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Referendums%20on%20family%20and%20care&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-
referendums/referendum-on-family-and-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/referendum-
on-family-and-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Referendums%20on%20family%20and%20care&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-
referendums/referendum-on-family-and-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland to care for a family member_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-to-care-for-a-family-member/)

This page includes information on returning to Ireland to care for a family
member.

1263.1309

  * [ _Worksheet: One-Parent Family Payment and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-one-parent-family-payment-and-income-from-work/)

This worksheet shows the effect of income from work on your One-Parent Family
Payment.

1085.5648

  * [ _One-Parent Family Payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)

One-Parent Family Payment is a payment for people who are bringing children up
without the support of a partner.

946.5276

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

