**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ European government and law ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/) > [ The EU and freedom of movement
](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-union/) > The
Schengen Area

#  The Schengen Area

  * Introduction 
  * Visas and borders in the Schengen Area 
  * European Travel Information and Authorisation System (ETIAS) 
  * Policing and security 
  * Asylum seekers and people with international protection status 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The Schengen Area is the name given to a region of Europe without border
checks between countries.

Ireland is **not** part of the Schengen Area, which means that if you travel
to the Schengen Area from Ireland, you pass through an immigration checkpoint
and have to show your passport or national identity card.

The Schengen Area includes the [ member states of the EU ](https://european-
union.europa.eu/easy-read_en) except for Ireland and Cyprus.

It also includes:

  * Iceland 
  * Liechtenstein 
  * Norway 
  * Switzerland 

Bulgaria and Romania lifted checks at their internal air and sea borders from
31 March 2024. Checks at their internal land borders will be lifted at a time
to be decided by the Council of the European Union.

The Schengen Area was created following the Schengen Agreement, named after
the village in Luxemburg where it was signed in 1985. The Schengen Convention,
which followed in 1990, set out more details on the operation of the
borderless area.

Ireland takes part in some of the policing co-operation agreements that are
part of the Schengen Agreement - see ‘Policing and security’ below for more
information.

##  Visas and borders in the Schengen Area

There are no border checks between the Schengen countries. You only pass
through border checks at the external border of the Schengen Area.

The [ Visa Information System (VIS) ](https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-
we-do/policies/borders-and-visas/visa-information-system) allows Schengen
member states to share visa information. Each Schengen country has the same
rules about entry and short stay visas.

If you are not a citizen of an EEA member state (the EU plus Iceland, Norway
and Liechtenstein), you may need a [ visa to travel to Ireland ](/en/moving-
country/visas-for-ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-ireland/) , even if
you have a Schengen visa.

If you are a non-EEA citizen and you currently live in Ireland, you may need a
Schengen visa to travel to the Schengen Area, even if you have a valid Irish
Residence Permit (IRP). You should check with the [ embassy of the country you
plan to visit. ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies-in-ireland/)

###  Where do I apply for a Schengen visa?

You only need to make one visa application for your visit, even if you plan to
travel to more than one country in the Schengen Area. There are rules about
which country’s embassy you should make your visa application to:

  * If you are visiting one country in the Schengen Area, you should apply to the embassy of the country you plan to visit 
  * If you are visiting more than one country, you should make your application to the embassy of the country where you plan to spend the most time 
  * If you are spending the same amount of time in more than one country, you should apply to the embassy of the country where you are going first 

###  Free movement of people

The Schengen Agreement does not affect the rights of EEA citizens to live and
work in other EEA countries. This is covered by EU directives and regulations
on the [ free movement of people ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-
government/european-union/freedom-of-movement-in-the-eu/) .

You should note that many countries in the EEA require their own citizens and
visitors to carry some form of identification. You should carry your passport
or national identity card as you could be asked to prove that you have a legal
right to be in the Schengen Area.

##  European Travel Information and Authorisation System (ETIAS)

The [ European Travel Information and Authorisation System (ETIAS)
](https://travel-europe.europa.eu/etias_en) is due to start in 2025. People
from countries outside the EU and EEA who **do not** need a visa to enter the
Schengen Area, will need to get an ETIAS before they travel. This system will
be similar to the ESTA system for travelling to the United States.

The [ European Travel Information and Authorisation System (ETIAS)
](https://travel-europe.europa.eu/etias_en) will cover travel to the Schengen
Area and Cyprus.

If approved, your ETIAS is valid for 3 years or until your passport expires.
You can move freely within the Schengen Area (and to the countries above)
after your arrival, for up to 90 days.

Applicants will need to pay a fee and apply online giving some basic personal
information.

##  Policing and security

The Schengen Agreement also means that member states co-ordinate security and
policing activities. These include:

  * Cross-border surveillance 
  * Hot pursuit 
  * The Schengen Information System (SIS) 

####  Cross-border surveillance

The European Border Surveillance System ( [ EUROSUR
](https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/borders-and-
visas/border-crossing/eurosur_en) ) is used by Schengen member states to co-
ordinate and exchange information. It aims to stop cross-border crime.

####  Hot pursuit

Under the Schengen Agreement, police who are in active pursuit of a criminal
can continue their pursuit into a neighbouring country provided that country
is also in the Schengen Area.

####  Schengen Information System (SIS)

EU member states use the Schengen Information System (SIS) to share
information about security and border management. Countries can issue a SIS
alert about a person or object, which also includes information about what to
do if that person or object has been found.

Ireland is connected to SIS. This means that Ireland can send and receive
alerts on people and objects. These alerts are used to help trace missing
people, people who are wanted by the police in a member state, and/or objects
that are missing or stolen.

You can get [ more information about SIS on garda.ie
](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/our-departments/garda-national-crime-
security-intelligence-service1/schengen-information-system-sis-/) . You can
get [ information on the right to access your personal information
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/coordinated-supervision-committee-csc) held
on SIS from the Data Protection Commission. You can read more about these
rights on the [ website of the European Data Protection Board
](https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/csc-data-subject-
rights/schengen-information-system-guide-exercising_en) .

##  Asylum seekers and people with international protection status

###  Asylum Seekers

[ Asylum seekers ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-
process-in-ireland/rights-and-obligations-of-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)
cannot move freely within the Schengen Area. This is because they must stay in
the country where they have lodged their application for international
protection. The [ Dublin III Regulations ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-
and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/dublin-convention/) set out the
rules on where a claim for international protection asylum should be made
within the European Union.

###  Refugees and subsidiary protection

If you have [ refugee or subsidiary protection status ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/your-
rights-when-you-get-international-protection/) , you can move freely within
the Schengen area and stay for up to 90 days. If you wish to live in another
country in the Schengen area, you have to make an application for residence to
that country’s embassy before traveling there. You may also need a work permit
if you want to take up employment.

##  Further information

You can read more about:

  * [ Documents you need to travel in Europe ](https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/travel/entry-exit/index_en.htm)
  * [ The legal basis for Eurosur ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2013.295.01.0011.01.ENG&toc=OJ:L:2013:295:FULL)
  * [ The legal basis for Frontex ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2016.251.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ:L:2016:251:FULL)
  * [ Schengen Convention ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:42000A0922\(02\))

_**Page edited:** 2 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/european-union/schengen-
area/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=The%20Schengen%20Area&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/european-union/schengen-
area/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/european-union/schengen-
area/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=The%20Schengen%20Area&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/european-union/schengen-
area/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Common Travel Area between Ireland and the UK_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/)

This page discusses the Common Travel Area between Ireland and the UK, an area
which is not specifically provided for in legislation.

1686.7144

  * [ _The euro area_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-union/euro-area/)

The euro is the national currency of 19 EU member states. This document
explains how it operates.

1392.429

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

1250.8787

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

