**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Elections and referendums ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/) > [ Types of elections and referendums
](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-
referendums/) > General elections

#  General elections

  * Introduction 
  * How often are general elections held? 
  * Who can run as a candidate in a general election? 
  * General election posters and campaigning 
  * How to vote in a general election 
  * What happens if I cannot attend the polling station? 
  * Forming a government 
  * Useful contacts 

##  Introduction

Ireland is a parliamentary democracy, which means the people of Ireland decide
who will represent them in [ _Dáil Éireann_ ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) (the lower house of the
_Oireachtas,_ or Irish parliament), and which political party or parties will
form the government.

Members of the Dáil are called TDs ( _Teachta Dála_ ) and the head of
government is the [ _Taoiseach_
](../../national_government/the_irish_government/the_taoiseach.en.html) . The
upper house of the Oireachtas is [ the _Seanad_ ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/the-seanad/) .

Under Irish law, the Dáil cannot continue for longer than 5 years. The
President dissolves the Dáil, usually on the advice of the Taoiseach. See ‘How
often are general elections held’ below.

The [ Constitution ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) states there must be a TD for every
20,000 to 30,000 people in the population. Following the general election in
2020, there are 160 TDs serving 39 constituencies. A TD’s constituency is the
area that they are elected to represent.

You can vote in a general election if you are:

  * An Irish or British citizen 
  * Aged 18 or over on the day of the election 
  * [ Registered to vote ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/registering-to-vote/)

You can read more about:

  * [ Voting in a general election ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/voting-procedure-in-a-general-election/)
  * [ Eligibility to vote in elections and referendums ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/right-to-vote/)

###  Electoral Commission constituency review 2023

On 30 August 2023, [ the Electoral Commission
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-
referenda/voting/electoral-commission/) published its [ review of Ireland’s
electoral constituencies ](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/constituency-
reviews.html) .

The report recommends that:

  * The number of TDs in [ Dáil Eireann ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) is increased to 174 (from 160) 
  * The number of Dáil constituencies is increased to 43 (from 39) 

The Oireachtas will consider the [ full report and its recommendations (pdf)
](https://ec-report.s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/constituency-review-
report-2023.pdf) . If the Oireachtas accepts the changes, they will be passed
into law and come into effect before the next general election.

##  How often are general elections held?

A Dáil cannot continue for longer than 5 years. This is set out in the [
Electoral (Amendment) Act 1927
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1927/act/21/section/7/enacted/en/html#sec7)
.

The Taoiseach can ask the President to dissolve the Dáil at any time. The
President can only refuse to do this if the government does not have a
majority in the Dáil (a _minority government_ ).

A general election may also be called if:

  * The Taoiseach and government have lost a vote of no confidence in the Dáil. Under the [ Constitution of Ireland ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) , the Taoiseach and government must resign once a new government is formed. 
  * A _coalition partner_ (a smaller party that joins a larger party to form a government) has withdrawn its support for the government. 

In both situations, opposition parties may be able to form a government and
elect a new Taoiseach without a general election taking place.

The act of ending a Dáil is known as _dissolution_ . A general election must
be held within 30 days of the [ dissolution of the Dáil ](/en/government-in-
ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) . Once the President proclaims
that the Dáil is dissolved, the Clerk of the Dáil directs the returning
officer in each constituency to prepare for an election. The polling day is
set by the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government.

##  Who can run as a candidate in a general election?

To run as a candidate for Dáil Eireann, you must be:

  * A citizen of Ireland 
  * Over 21 years of age 

If you want to run as a candidate for a political party, you will have to go
through the party’s selection procedure. You can read about [ registering a
political party ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/running-
for-office/registering-a-political-party/) .

If you want to run as an independent candidate, you must present a nomination
paper to the returning officer in the constituency where you want to stand.
You can nominate yourself, and you can run in more than one constituency. You
do not have to live in, or own property in, the constituency where you want to
run.

You also must be able to give the returning officer:

  * A Certificate of Party Affiliation, or 
  * Statutory declarations signed by 30 constituents, or 
  * A deposit of €500 

Your nomination paper must be submitted by 12 noon on the 7th day after the
Clerk of the Dáil has issued a writ (a written document containing a legal
order) directing that an election be held.

You can read more about [ eligibility for membership of Dáil Eireann
](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) .

##  General election posters and campaigning

Once the date of a general election has been set, candidates will canvass for
your vote. This can involve calling from door to door, sending out election
leaflets, putting up posters, and televised debates and party political
broadcasts.

There are strict rules governing how parties and candidates campaign for an
election. There are also laws governing how much money can be spent by
candidates and parties.

###  How much can candidates spend on their campaign?

The legal limit that can be spent by candidates depends on the number of seats
that are being contested in the constituency.

The maximum that a candidate can spend on a Dáil election is:

  * €45,200 per candidate in a five-seat constituency 
  * €37,650 per candidate in a four-seat constituency 
  * €30,150 per candidate in a three-seat constituency 

If a candidate receives at least one quarter of the quota of votes for the
constituency, they can claim back up to €8,700 in election expenses. You can
read more about quotas in our page on [ proportional representation
](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/proportional-
representation/) .

###  Posters and leaflets

There are rules governing posters and leaflets, and other forms of advertising
during an election campaign:

  * Posters can only be hung on poles with the permission of the pole owner 
  * Leaflets cannot be left under windscreen wipers 
  * Posters must carry the name and address of the printer 
  * Posters should not cause any disruption to road users 

Laws on election posters and leaflets do not cover:

  * Posters erected on private land (with the owner’s permission) 
  * Billboard advertisements, which come under regular planning laws 
  * Cars or trucks with election signage or pictures, so long as the signage is secured 

Local authorities have powers to remove posters where it is in the public
interest to do so.

###  When can candidates put up election posters?

Candidates can put up posters 30 days before the polling date, or from the
date that the ministerial polling day order, whichever is the shortest period.

On polling day, you [ cannot display posters or campaign for a candidate or
party
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.irishstatutebook.ie%2Feli%2F1992%2Fact%2F23%2Fenacted%2Fen%2Fprint%23sec147&data=05%7C02%7CGwen.Gunning%40ciboard.ie%7C84492ea70fa945d6297908dc9f428467%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638560355239511867%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=6XT9R8vyD1thpsWt1NS19gXV3xn%2BNWGTUvAEwHQ%2B3W4%3D&reserved=0)
within [ 50 metres of a polling station
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.irishstatutebook.ie%2Feli%2F2001%2Fact%2F38%2Fsection%2F33%2Fenacted%2Fen%2Fhtml%23sec33&data=05%7C02%7CGwen.Gunning%40ciboard.ie%7C84492ea70fa945d6297908dc9f428467%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638560355239517840%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=XuTsfUzS9U5IgtQifnpNvmenSGktyNPCFK3FW9sqYw4%3D&reserved=0)
.

Failure to remove election posters within 7 days after the polling date is an
offence.

##  How to vote in a general election

To vote in a general election, you must go to a polling station on the day of
the election (polling day). Some people are [ eligible to vote by post
](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/registering-to-
vote#lc5b52) .

If you are on the Register of Electors, a polling card will be sent to your
home before the date of the general election. Your polling card includes your
elector number and will tell you where you can vote.

You can read more about [ voting in a general election ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/voting-procedure-in-a-general-
election/) and [ proportional representation ](/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/proportional-representation/) .

##  What happens if I cannot attend the polling station?

Ireland only allows for postal voting in limited circumstances, and you must
be registered on either the postal voters list or the special voters list in
advance of the election.

If you cannot attend on the day of the election and do not qualify as a
special or postal voter, you will be unable to vote.

You can read more about [ facilities for voters with disabilities
](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/facilities-for-
voters-with-disabilities/) .

##  Forming a government

Once all the seats have been filled, the Dáil votes on who will serve as
Taoiseach and [ lead a government ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/national-government/government-of-ireland/) . If one party has a
majority, or has the support of other parties and/or independents, it will be
clear who will lead the country into the new Dáil session.

If there is no clear majority, there may be a period of negotiation, where
groups of parties and/or independent TDs try to build a majority.

If there is no clear winner, and T.D.s are unable to decide who should form a
government, the Taoiseach (from the previous government) may have to ask the
President to dissolve the Dáil again.

##  Useful contacts

###  An Coimisiún Toghcháin

Dublin Castle  
Dublin 2  
D02 X8X8

**Homepage:** [ https://www.electoralcommission.ie
](https://www.electoralcommission.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.electoralcommission.ie/contact-us/
](https://www.electoralcommission.ie/contact-us/)

**Email:** [ info@electoralcommission.ie ](mailto:info@electoralcommission.ie)

###  Franchise Section

Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage

Custom House  
Dublin 1  
D01 W6X0  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 888 2000

**Locall:** 1890 20 20 21

**Email:** [ franchise@housing.gov.ie ](mailto:franchise@housing.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 8 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/the-
general-election/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=General%20elections&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/the-
general-election/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/the-
general-election/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=General%20elections&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/the-
general-election/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Voting in a general election_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/voting-procedure-in-a-general-election/)

Find out about what you need to do on the day of a general election and how to
vote.

2094.027

  * [ _Presidential elections in Ireland_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/types-of-elections-and-referendums/presidential-election/)

The President is elected directly by the people of Ireland. Read about who can
vote, who can stand for election and how the process works.

1752.3069

  * [ _The regulation of elections_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/electoral-commission/)

An Coimisiún Toghcháin (the Electoral Commission) oversees elections and
referendums in Ireland.

1727.9417

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

