**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/) > Citizens' Assembly

#  Citizens' Assembly

  * What is a Citizens' Assembly? 
  * Citizens' Assembly on drugs use 
  * Previous Citizens’ Assemblies 
  * Members of the Citizens' Assembly 
  * How the Assembly works 
  * Further information 

##  What is a Citizens' Assembly?

A Citizens’ Assembly brings citizens together to discuss and consider
important legal and policy issues in Ireland. The Assembly then makes
recommendations and reports back to the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament).

##  Citizens' Assembly on drugs use

A Citizens’ Assembly on [ drugs use ](https://citizensassembly.ie/assembly-on-
drugs-use/) started in April 2023. The Assembly met for the [ final time
](https://citizensassembly.ie/citizens-assembly-on-drugs-use-publishes-
full-36-recommendations/) on 22 October 2023.

The Assembly presented its [ final report including 36 recommendations
](https://citizensassembly.ie/launch-of-the-report-of-the-citizens-assembly-
on-drugs-use/) for a new Irish model to reduce harm caused by illicit drugs
use on 25 January 2024.

##  Previous Citizens’ Assemblies

###  2022

Two Citizens’ Assemblies took place in 2022. They considered:

  * A [ directly elected mayor for Dublin ](https://citizensassembly.ie/dublin-citizens-assembly/)
  * How to respond to the [ loss of biodiversity ](https://citizensassembly.ie/citizens-assembly-on-biodiversity-loss/)

The Citizens’ Assembly on a directly elected mayor for Dublin met for the
final time on 1 October 2022. The Assembly voted in favour of recommending a
directly elected mayor, and presented its [ final report including its
recommendations ](https://citizensassembly.ie/final-report-of-the-dublin-
citizens-assembly-launched/) on 27 January 2023.

The Citizens’ Assembly on the loss of biodiversity met for the final time on
21 January 2023. The Assembly presented its [ final report including its
recommendations ](https://citizensassembly.ie/report-of-the-citizens-assembly-
on-biodiversity-loss-report-launches/) on 5 April 2023.

###  2020-2021

The 2020-2021 Citizens’ Assembly was established to consider [ gender equality
](https://citizensassembly.ie/overview-previous-assemblies/assembly-on-gender-
equality/) . The Assembly made its [ final report including its
recommendations (pdf) ](https://citizensassembly.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2023/02/report-of-the-citizens-assembly-on-gender-
equality.pdf) on 2 June 2021.

###  2016-2018

Between [ 2016 and 2018 ](https://citizensassembly.ie/overview-previous-
assemblies/2016-2018-citizens-assembly/) , the Citizens’ Assembly was
established to consider:

  * The [ Eighth Amendment of the Constitution (pdf) ](https://citizensassembly.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/FirstReport_EIGHTAMENDMENT.pdf)
  * How we best [ respond to the challenges and opportunities of an ageing population (pdf) ](https://citizensassembly.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Final-Report-on-Older-People-Incl-Appendix-A-D.pdf)
  * [ Fixed term parliaments (pdf) ](https://citizensassembly.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Final-Report-on-Manner-in-which-Referenda-are-Held-Fixed-Term-Parliaments.pdf)
  * The [ manner in which referenda are held (pdf) ](https://citizensassembly.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Final-Report-on-Manner-in-which-Referenda-are-Held-Fixed-Term-Parliaments.pdf)
  * How the State can [ make Ireland a leader in tackling climate change (pdf) ](https://citizensassembly.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/ThirdReportClimate-Change-Report-Final.pdf)

##  Members of the Citizens' Assembly

A Citizens’ Assembly is typically made up of 99 randomly selected members of
the public and one appointed chairperson.

Before 2022, members of the Citizens' Assembly were selected at random from
the electoral register.

Since 2022, any adult resident in the State is eligible to become a member of
a Citizens' Assembly. This includes people who are not Irish citizens and who
are not enrolled on the electoral register.

Invitations are sent to randomly-selected households. From those who reply
agreeing to take part, members are selected to reflect Irish society in terms
of age, gender, social class and regional spread.

##  How the Assembly works

Each Assembly agrees its own rules and procedures for how it will carry out
its business. The Government and the Oireachtas agree Terms of Reference
before a Citizens’ Assembly starts, which are guidelines that help define the
work of the Assembly.

The Assembly may invite and accept submissions from people who are interested
in any of the issues being discussed, such as expert advisory groups.

When the Assembly finishes considering each issue, it develops a series of
draft recommendations and votes on each. It then reports to the [ Houses of
the Oireachtas ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-
eireann/) and makes recommendations. The next step for the Government is to
provide a response to each recommendation and arrange for a debate in the
Oireachtas.

If the Government accepts a recommendation that the Constitution should be
amended, its response in the Oireachtas will include a timeframe for the
holding of a referendum.

##  Further information

You can find details of [ previous Assembly meetings
](https://citizensassembly.ie/overview-previous-assemblies/2016-2018-citizens-
assembly/) on the Citizens’ Assembly website. You can watch videos and streams
of the Assembly’s meetings on the [ Citizens’ Assembly YouTube channel
](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCh082syV8XCzDKTzPSOXLuw) .

###  Citizens' Assembly

16 Parnell Square,  
Dublin,  
Ireland  
D01 A2W2

**Tel:** 01-6194110

**Homepage:** [ https://www.citizensassembly.ie/en/
](https://www.citizensassembly.ie/en/)

**Email:** [ info@citizensassembly.ie ](mailto:info@citizensassembly.ie)

_**Page edited:** 15 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/citizens-
assembly/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Citizens%27%20Assembly&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/citizens-
assembly/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/citizens-
assembly/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Citizens%27%20Assembly&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/citizens-
assembly/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1080.6665

  * [ _Irish citizenship and passports for children born abroad_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/irish-citizenship-and-passports-for-children-born-abroad/)

Outlines the rules about Irish citizenship for children who were born abroad
and have an Irish parent. It also covers the documents you need when applying
for an Irish passport for children born abroad.

1037.402

  * [ _EU/EEA citizens and social welfare payments_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-welfare/)

EU, EEA and Swiss citizens can claim family benefits in Ireland. They can also
get social welfare payments if they lose their job or become sick or
incapacitated.

936.47296

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

