**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ European government and law ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/) > [ EU Institutions ](/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/) > European Ombudsman

#  European Ombudsman

  * Introduction 
  * Jurisdiction 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Investigation process 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The office of the European Ombudsman was established in 1992 by the [
Maastricht Treaty ](https://europa.eu/european-union/law/treaties_en) . Its
purpose is to investigate complaints made by citizens and people living in the
[ European Union (EU) ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-
government/european-union/european-union/) of maladministration in the
institutions and bodies of the EU. They are also responsible for proactively
looking into broader systemic issues and launching their own investigations.

" _Maladministration_ " means bad administration and happens if an institution
does not respect:

  * Fundamental rights 
  * Laws or rules 
  * The principles of good administration 

Some examples of maladministration are:

  * Discrimination 
  * Abuse of power 
  * Lack or refusal of information and 
  * Unnecessary delay 

The role of the European Ombudsman is to safeguard the fundamental rights of
people living in the EU by promoting open and accountable administrations
within the EU. The role of the Ombudsman is complementary to that of the
courts. A finding of maladministration by the Ombudsman does not automatically
mean that something illegal has happened.

The European Ombudsman delivers an Annual Report to the [ European Parliament
](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-
parliament/) .

##  Jurisdiction

Institutions and bodies that fall within the European Ombudsman's jurisdiction
include the following:

  * The [ European Commission ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-commission/)
  * The [ Council of the European Union ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/council-of-the-european-union/)
  * The [ European Parliament ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-parliament/)
  * The [ Court of Auditors ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/court-of-auditors/)
  * The [ Court of Justice ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/) (except in its judicial role) 
  * The [ European Economic and Social Committee ](https://www.eesc.europa.eu/en)
  * The [ Committee of the Regions ](https://cor.europa.eu/en)
  * The [ European Central Bank ](http://www.ecb.int/)
  * The [ European Investment Bank ](https://www.eib.org/en/)
  * The [ European Personnel Selection Office ](https://epso.europa.eu/home_en)
  * The [ European Anti-Fraud Office ](https://ec.europa.eu/anti-fraud/home_en)
  * The [ European Police Office (Europol) ](https://www.europol.europa.eu/)
  * Any other European Union body 

Citizens and people living in the EU have a right to access any document held
by an EU institution, with some exceptions. If the institution claims that an
exception applies to a document you have requested you can apply to the
European Ombudsmen to appeal this decision and give you [ access to the
document ](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/access-to-documents) . The
Ombudsmen has a [ fast-track ](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/access-to-
documents/fast-track) in place and aims to give a decision in these cases
within 40 days.

The European Ombudsman cannot deal with complaints concerning national,
regional or local authorities of member states, even when the complaints are
about European Union law. If the European Ombudsman is unable to investigate
your complaint, they will do their best to advise you of another body that
could help. The [ European Network of Ombudsmen
](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/european-network-of-ombudsmen/about/en)
was established in 1996 to connect the European Ombudsmen with national and
regional ombudsmen and make sure that complaints are dealt with at an
appropriate level.

You can read more about Ireland’s national [ Ombudsman ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-
ombudsman/) , who deals with complaints about [ government departments
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/national-
government/departments-of-state/) , [ local authorities ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/local-and-regional-government/functions-of-local-
authorities/) , the [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](/en/health/health-
system/health-service-executive/) and other public bodies in Ireland.

###  Who can complain to the European Ombudsman?

If you are a citizen of a member state of the European Union or are living in
a member state, you are entitled to make a complaint to the European
Ombudsman. Businesses, associations or other bodies with a registered office
in a member state may also lodge a complaint with the European Ombudsman.

Complaints to the European Ombudsman are free of charge.

##  How to make a complaint

You can submit a complaint online, by post or by fax. To submit a complaint
online you must [ create an account on their website
](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/complainant-login) . To make a complaint
by letter you can [ download the complaint form
](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/make-a-complaint) and write a letter
explaining your complaint. You should also include copies of relevant
correspondence. You can post or fax the completed form and letter using the
contact information which is listed under Further information.

A complaint must be made within two years of the date when you first learned
about the issue. You do not need to be personally affected by the
maladministration.

Before making a complaint with the Ombudsman you must have tried to resolve
the matter with the institution concerned directly.

The European Ombudsman will examine your complaint and you will be informed of
the outcome of their investigation.

The European Ombudsman does not deal with matters that are currently before a
court or that have already been settled by a court.

The European Ombudsman’s website has an [ interactive
](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/checklist-for-making-a-complaint)
checklist you can use to see if your complaint meets their criteria for an
issue they can address.

##  Investigation process

Once the European Ombudsman receives your complaint they will check whether
they can investigate it. If they determine that your issue falls within their
remit then they will open an inquiry you will be informed of this by letter.

The Ombudsman will first forward the complaint to the relevant institution and
request an opinion. The EU institutions are required to supply the Ombudsman
with any information they request. The Ombudsman may inspect documents,
conduct interviews and/or carry out an inspection at the institution. They may
also ask you for more information about your complaint.

Once the Ombudsman has finished their inquiry there are three possible
outcomes:

  * No Maladministration – the Ombudsman determines that the institution acted correctly 
  * A simple issue – in many cases the institution itself acts to settle the matter during the inquiry, or the Ombudsman is able to achieve a friendly solution that satisfies both you and the institution. 
  * Maladministration – if the Ombudsman finds that the institution acted incorrectly and cannot get the parties involved to agree on a solution, then they will make an official recommendation of what the institution should do. If the institution does not accept the recommendation then the Ombudsman can make a special report to the European Parliament. The Ombudsman’s decisions are not legally binding. 

##  Where to apply

If you have a complaint that is not covered by the Ombudsman [ one of these
bodies may be able to help you ](https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/who-else-
can-help-you/en) .

###  The European Ombudsman

1 Avenue de Président Robert Schuman  
CS 30403  
F-67001 Strasbourg Cedex  
France

**Tel:** +33 3 88172313

**Fax:** +33 3 88179062

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu
](http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/shortcuts/contacts.faces
](http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/shortcuts/contacts.faces)

_**Page edited:** 9 November 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-
ombudsman/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=European%20Ombudsman&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-
ombudsman/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-
ombudsman/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=European%20Ombudsman&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-
ombudsman/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Council of the European Union_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/council-of-the-european-union/)

The Council of the European Union consists of one government minister from
every member state. The Council is part of the law making process in the
European Union.

2251.798

  * [ _Air passenger rights in the European Union_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-eu/)

Find out about your rights when purchasing tickets, reserving flights and
travelling by air with European airlines.

2101.9907

  * [ _Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/)

The Court of Justice of the European Union ensures that European law is
interpreted and applied in each member state. Find out about the other
important functions of this court.

2051.783

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

