**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ Standards and accountability
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-
accountability/) > Rights Tribunals

#  Rights Tribunals

  * Introduction 
  * How rights tribunals are set up 
  * Examples of rights tribunals 

##  Introduction

There are many tribunals in Ireland that make binding decisions about people's
rights but are not a court of law. A rights tribunal acts like a court but is
not part of the courts system. It interprets and applies the law to make
binding decisions on disputes between different parties.

Rights tribunals are established by an Act of the Oireachtas. Their purpose is
to provide a quick, informal and inexpensive alternative to the courts system
in a specific area of law (for example, employment law). Rights tribunals deal
with a wide range of disputes.

##  How rights tribunals are set up

The [ legislation ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-
oireachtas/legislation/) establishing the tribunal sets out how many members
will sit on it and if they will be lawyers, civil servants or representatives
of industry. It also sets out the powers of the tribunal and the procedures
that will be applied.

The legislation also states how a decision of the rights tribunal can be
appealed. In some cases there might be a special appeals process set out in
the legislation. For example, appeals from the Workplace Relations Commission
are made to the Labour Court.

The legislation may also state that there is no appeal to the court except by
way of [ judicial review ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/standards-and-accountability/judicial-review-public-decisions/) in the
High Court. This means that the court will not substitute its own verdict for
the decision made by the tribunal, but will ensure that the decision was made
fairly. If the decision of the tribunal was made without following fair
procedures, it may be set aside (cancelled) by the High Court.

The State pays the cost of running a rights tribunal. Parties appearing before
a rights tribunal generally have to pay for their own legal representation.

##  Examples of rights tribunals

Some well-known rights tribunals include:

  * [ Criminal Injuries Compensation Tribunal ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/compensation-for-victims-of-crime/) : This tribunal decides the level of compensation to be paid to persons who have suffered injuries in the course of a criminal act. 
  * [ Workplace Relations Commission ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-relations-commission/) : This tribunal investigates disputes between employers and employees and makes recommendations. 
  * [ International Protection Appeals Tribunal ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/if-your-application-for-refugee-status-is-refused/) : This tribunal hears appeals by asylum seekers against decisions to refuse them international protection. 
  * [ An Bord Plean√°la ](/en/housing/planning-permission/appealing-planning-permission-decision/) : This tribunal hears appeals against either the granting or the refusing of planning permission by a planning authority. 
  * [ Social Welfare Appeals Office ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/) : The appeals officer decides on applications for allowances or benefits under the social welfare legislation. 
  * [ Valuation Tribunal ](http://www.valuationtribunal.ie/) . This tribunal hears disputes in relation to the rateable valuation of properties. The rateable valuation is the value that the local authority puts on property for the purpose of deciding what rates will be charged. 
  * [ The Intellectual Property Office of Ireland: ](https://www.ipoi.gov.ie/en/) decides whether certain inventions are entitled to be registered as patents and whether certain symbols, drawings, marks and shapes may be registered as trade marks. 

_**Page edited:** 11 May 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/rights-
tribunals/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rights%20Tribunals&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/rights-
tribunals/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/rights-
tribunals/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Rights%20Tribunals&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/rights-
tribunals/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tribunals of inquiry_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-of-inquiry/)

A tribunal of inquiry investigates a specific matter(s) of public importance
and submits a report to the Oireachtas setting out its findings of fact.

1491.2424

  * [ _Rights and duties of asylum seekers in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/rights-and-obligations-of-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

People applying for international protection in Ireland have certain legal
rights. They also have important duties. Find out about these rights and
obligations.

1166.0018

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1165.2018

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

