**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ Standards and accountability
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-
accountability/) > Public petitions

#  Public petitions

  * Introduction 
  * Petition guidelines 
  * Decision process 
  * Contact information 

##  Introduction

The parliamentary public petitions system allows members of the public to
raise issues of general public interest with the [ Houses of the Oireachtas
(parliament)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/houses_of_the_oireachtas/)
.

Decisions about petitions are made by the [ Joint Committee on Public
Petitions ](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/committees/33/petitions/) , which is
a parliamentary committee consisting of TDs and Senators.

##  Petition guidelines

If you are submitting a petition it must relate to a matter on which the
Houses of the Oireachtas have the power to act and the petition must be in the
proper form. It must not:

  * Relate to a case where court proceedings have been initiated and the case will be heard before a jury 
  * Contain any names of individuals 
  * Contain offensive language 
  * Be frivolous 
  * Be the same as a petition brought by you, or on your behalf, during the current lifetime of the Dáil 
  * Require the committee to consider a complaint that has already had a decision made about it by an Ombudsman or some redress body. 

You will be asked to show that you have already tried to resolve the issue
raised in your petition, for example, by raising it with the Ombudsman, public
bodies, or directly with the relevant Government Department.

Your petition should also include the name and address of anyone who has
agreed to support the petition, though only one signature is necessary to
submit a petition.

You are encouraged to [ submit your petition online
](http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/PetitionForm?openform&type=screening+page&lang=EN&r=0.474830243381399)
. You can also [ download the petition form (pdf)
](http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/Postal_Petitions_Form_\(EN\).pdf)
and submit it:

  * By e-mail to [ submitapetition@oireachtas.ie ](mailto:submitapetition@oireachtas.ie)

or

  * By post to the Clerk to the Joint Committee on Public Petitions at the address below 

There is no charge for submitting a petition.

##  Decision process

You submit your petition to the [ Joint Committee on Public Petitions.
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/committees/33/petitions/) The Joint Committee
must first decide whether your petition is compliant with [ Dáil and Seanad
standing orders (pdf)
](http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/Standing Orders
\(English\).pdf) . If it decides that it is, it will then consider your
petition.

When considering your petition the Joint Committee may invite you to appear
before it. It may also seek oral or written evidence from the relevant
government department, as well as other relevant bodies. It may also:

  * Refer your petition to some other parliamentary committee for further consideration 
  * Refer your petition to an ombudsman or some regulatory or redress body 

Following its considerations, the Joint Committee makes a decision on what
further action it will take. This action can include reporting to the [ Dáil
](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) with
recommendations, and requesting that the report be debated by the Dáil.

If the Joint Committee decides that no further action is required your
petition will be closed. You will be notified of the Joint Committee’s final
decision.

[ Further information and advice on the petitions process
](http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/PetitionForm?openform&type=intro+to+petitions&lang=EN&r=0.75066758220798)
can be obtained from the Clerk to the Joint Committee on Public Petitions. A [
list of petitions already submitted
](http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/Published_Petitions_EN?openview&start=1&count=15&type=see+all+petitions&lang=EN&r=0.301411459525444)
is available on the Houses of the Oireachtas website.

##  Contact information

###  Joint Committee on Public Petitions

Houses of the Oireachtas

Leinster House  
Kildare Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 618 4216

**Homepage:** [
http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/PetitionForm?openform&type=intro+to+petitions&lang=EN&r=0.761379415579461
](http://petitions.oireachtas.ie/online_petitions.nsf/PetitionForm?openform&type=intro+to+petitions&lang=EN&r=0.761379415579461)

**Email:** [ submitapetition@oireachtas.ie
](mailto:submitapetition@oireachtas.ie)

_**Page edited:** 15 November 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/public-
petitions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Public%20petitions&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/public-
petitions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/public-
petitions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Public%20petitions&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/public-
petitions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Public order offences_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/public-order-offenses-in-ireland/)

The law on public order offences is mainly set down in the Criminal Justice
(Public Order) Act 1994. It deals with how people behave in public places and
also provides for crowd control at public events. Find out more about the
different types of offences.

1804.9591

  * [ _Director of Public Prosecutions_ ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/director-of-public-prosecutions/)

The Director of Public Prosecutions is responsible for the prosecution of
people charged with committing crimes in the State.

1758.672

  * [ _Re-use of Public Sector Information_ ](/en/about/reuse-psi/)

Information about how to re-use content from the Citizens Information website.
You are free to re-use or re-produce content provided you acknowledge the
source.

1677.8479

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

