**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Government in Ireland ](/en/government-
in-ireland/) > [ How Government works in Ireland ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/) > [ Tribunals and investigations
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-
investigations/) > Public inquiries in Ireland

#  Public inquiries in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Tribunals of inquiry and commissions of investigation 
  * Parliamentary inquiries 
  * Non-statutory inquiries 
  * Redress 
  * Bodies with specialised investigative powers 

##  Introduction

A public inquiry is usually set up when something of significant public
importance has gone wrong. Its purpose is to find out the facts in relation to
the particular matter of public concern, which is identified in the terms of
reference of the inquiry.

It does not administer justice and cannot punish or impose penalties on
individuals. However, its findings could effect a person or organisation’s
reputation. The results of an inquiry might lead to criminal charges or to
those involved taking legal action.

As well as investigating the matter, an inquiry may make recommendations to
prevent it happening again.

There are a number of different types of public inquiry.

Other public bodies [ adjudicate in individual cases ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/rights-tribunals/) ,
and can issue recommendations and determinations on terms that have been set
out in statute. This includes bodies like the Workplace Relations Commission
and the Residential Tenancies Board.

##  Tribunals of inquiry and commissions of investigation

[ Tribunals of inquiry ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-of-inquiry/) are set up with
powers to investigate specific matters. They are usually chaired by judges or
senior lawyers. At the end of the investigation, the tribunal submits a report
to the Oireachtas, which may contain recommendations.

The Oireachtas has the power to establish a tribunal of inquiry to investigate
matters of public importance. The tribunal's function is purely fact-finding
and investigative. Although it may make recommendations, it does not make a
binding judgement on the rights or liabilities of individuals. It simply
states, in its report, the results of its investigations and the findings of
fact it has made.

A [ commission of investigation ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/tribunals-and-investigations/commissions-of-investigation/) is a less
expensive and speedier method of investigating matters of significant public
concern. It is set up by government order which must be approved by the Dáil
and Seanad. The terms of reference are set by the Government or by an
individual Minister. Evidence is usually given to the Commission in private.
The commission makes a final report on its findings to a specified Minister.

##  Parliamentary inquiries

The Oireachtas can nominate members to [ form a committee
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/committees/about-committees/) to examine
policy, legislation, or a particular topic. The committee can seek submissions
from experts and interested parties, and must report its findings back to the
Oireachtas. The committee uses an investigative process to reach conclusions
before making its report. Some committees (for example, the Committee of
Public Accounts) are standing committees. This means that they are established
after every general election.

###  Committees of Inquiry

Some committees have been set up to investigate specific incidents or
controversies of public importance. Some examples are:

  * Joint Committee of Inquiry into the Banking Crisis 
  * Judicial appointments inquiry 
  * Arms crisis inquiry 
  * Abbeylara inquiry 
  * DIRT inquiry 

The power of parliamentary committees has been limited by the courts. In 2002,
the Supreme Court held that the Houses of the Oireachtas did not have the
power under the Constitution to make findings of fact. A proposed change to
the Constitution to reverse the effects of this judgment was rejected by the
Irish people in a 2011 referendum.

The framework for parliamentary inquiries is now set out in the [ Houses of
the Oireachtas (Inquiries, Privileges and Procedures) Act 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2013/act/33/enacted/en/html) . Inquiries
can be concerned with systems, practices, procedures, policies and the
implementation of policy, and the effectiveness of legislative and regulatory
systems.

Such inquiries may not make any findings that adversely affect the good name
of someone who is not:

  * A member of [ the Dáil ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/dail-eireann/) or [ Seanad ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-oireachtas/the-seanad/) , or 
  * An officeholder or 
  * Someone who is directly accountable to the Oireachtas 

##  Non-statutory inquiries

When an inquiry is set up through an Act of the Oireachtas, it is called a
statutory inquiry. Tribunals of inquiry and commissions of investigation are
forms of statutory inquiry.

Not all inquiries are set up on a statutory basis. A Minister may commission
an inquiry into a matter of public importance. Some examples are:

  * In 2000 the Minister for Health and Children established an inquiry into the retention of human organs without permission 
  * In 2012 the Minister for Health and Children commissioned a [ report on the practice of symphysiotomy ](http://health.gov.ie/blog/publications/report-on-symphysiotomy-in-ireland-1944-1984-professor-oonagh-walsh/) in Ireland. 

Sometimes a preliminary inquiry may be held in order to make the work of the
main inquiry easier. The [ Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse
](http://www.childabusecommission.ie/about/index.html) was initially
established on an administrative basis in 1999 before being established on a
statutory basis in 2000 under the [ Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse Act
2000 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2000/en/act/pub/0007/index.html) .

Further information on inquiries and investigations is available in the Law
Reform Commission’s 2003 [ Consultation Paper on Public Inquiries (pdf)
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/consultation
papers/cpPublicInquiries.pdf) .

##  Redress

On some occasions, following an investigation, a scheme has been set up to
compensate the victims of the episode or conduct which was under investigation
at the inquiry. The following are examples of such compensation schemes:

  * The [ Hepatitis Compensation Tribunal ](http://www.hepccomptrib.com/) was set up in 1995. It provides compensation to those infected with Hepatitis C or HIV as a result of the use of Human Immunoglobulin Anti-D or as a result of the receipt of a blood transfusion or blood product within the State. 
  * The [ Residential Institutions Redress Board ](http://www.rirb.ie/) was established in 2002. It was set up to compensate those who, as children, were abused while resident in industrial schools, reformatories and other institutions subject to State regulation or inspection. 
  * [ Caranua ](http://www.caranua.ie/) was established in 2013 under the [ Residential Institutions Statutory Fund Act 2012 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2012/en/act/pub/0035/index.html) to help those who experienced abuse in residential institutions and have received settlements through the Residential Institutions Redress Board or the courts. 
  * The [ Symphysiotomy Payment Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/544fc6-the-surgical-symphysiotomy-ex-gratia-payment-scheme-report/) was set up in 2014 to provide ex-gratia payments to women who underwent a surgical symphysiotomy or a pubiotomy in any hospital in the State between 1940 and 1990. 

##  Bodies with specialised investigative powers

There is a range of specialised legislation regulating particular sectors,
such as the Companies Act 2014, which provide for investigations. The
following are some examples:

**Inquiries about** |  **Carried out by** |  **Legislation**  
---|---|---  
Railway accidents and incidents  |  [ Railway Accident Investigation Unit ](https://www.raiu.ie/) |  [ European Union (Railway Safety) (Reporting and Investigation of Serious Accidents, Accidents and Incidents) Regulations 2020 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/si/430/made/en/print)  
Marine casualties that take place in Irish waters, and accidents involving Irish registered vessels  |  [ Marine Casualty Investigation Board ](https://www.mcib.ie/) |  [ Merchant Shipping (Investigation of Marine Casualties) Act 2000 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2000/act/14/enacted/en/html) and associated regulations   
Aircraft accidents  |  [ Air Accident Investigation Unit ](http://www.aaiu.ie/) |  [ Air Navigation (Notification and Investigation of Accidents, Serious Accidents and Incidents) Regulations 2009 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2009/si/460/made/en/print)  
Companies  |  Inspectors appointed by a court  |  [ Part 13 of the Companies Act 2014 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2014/act/38/enacted/en/print#part13)  
  
_**Page edited:** 31 August 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-
introduction/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Public%20inquiries%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-
introduction/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-
introduction/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Public%20inquiries%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-
in-ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-
introduction/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tribunals of inquiry_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/tribunals-and-investigations/tribunals-of-inquiry/)

A tribunal of inquiry investigates a specific matter(s) of public importance
and submits a report to the Oireachtas setting out its findings of fact.

1010.6393

  * [ _Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)

There are 3 different ways to legally marry in Ireland.

952.1443

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

912.6127

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

