**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Renting a
home ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/) > [ Landlords' rights and responsibilities
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/) >
Registering a tenancy

#  Registering a tenancy

  * Introduction 
  * What tenancies must be registered? 
  * How often must tenancies be registered? 
  * What information do I need to register a tenancy? 
  * How do I know if my tenancy is registered? 
  * How much does it cost to register? 
  * How to register a tenancy with the RTB 

##  Introduction

Landlords must register residential tenancies with the [ Residential Tenancies
Board (RTB) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-disputes/residential-
tenancies-board/) every year and update the RTB if information about a tenancy
changes.

The RTB uses this information to keep a public [ register of tenancies
](https://www.rtb.ie/news/rtb-publishes-q1-2022-rent-index) . The register
shows the address of the property and the number of bedrooms. It does not show
the identity of the landlord or the tenants, or the amount of rent paid.

Since 4 April 2022, landlords have to register their tenancies annually.
Tenancies must be registered every year, within a month of the date of when
the tenancy began.

The [ Residential Tenancies (Amendment) Act 2019
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/act/14/enacted/en/html) sets out the
requirement for tenancies to be registered annually.

##  What tenancies must be registered?

Under residential tenancies legislation, most privately rented properties must
be registered with the RTB. This includes properties rented out by [ approved
housing bodies ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/approved-
housing-bodies/) and [ student-specific accommodation
](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/registrations/student-
specific-accommodation) .

Residential tenancies legislation **does not apply** to the following types of
rented property, so these tenancies do not need to be registered with the RTB:

  * Business lettings 
  * Holiday lettings 
  * Formerly rent-controlled properties or long-occupation lease tenancies – separate legislation applies to them 
  * Owner-occupied accommodation (for example, if you [ rent a room in your landlord's home ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/sharing-accommodation-with-your-landlord/) ) 
  * Properties where the spouse, parent or child of the landlord lives. This applies to informal family arrangements where there is no tenancy agreement in writing. However, the legislation does cover formal agreements between family members, for example, where a lease has been signed. 
  * [ Social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/) provided by local authorities 

##  How often must tenancies be registered?

**Landlords are responsible for registering tenancies** . New tenancies must
be registered by the landlord within a month of the start of the tenancy.
After that, landlords must re-register the tenancy every year that the same
tenancy continues. This must be done within a month of the date of when the
tenancy first began.

For example, if a new tenancy begins on 4 July 2024, the landlord must
register the tenancy by 3 August 2024 (within one month of the tenancy start
date). If the tenancy continues for the next 12 months, the landlord must
register the tenancy again by 3 August 2025, and then every year by 3 August
while the tenancy continues.

Annual registration has applied since 4 April 2022. The RTB will remind
landlords when their tenancy is due for annual registration, if they have up-
to-date contact information for the landlord.

##  What information do I need to register a tenancy?

The tenant must give their details to the landlord, including their [ Personal
Public Service number (PPS number) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/personal-public-service-number/) so the landlord can register the
tenancy.

Private landlords and approved housing bodies must provide the following
information when registering:

  * The address of the rented home 
  * The name, address and PPS number of the landlord (or registered number, if a company) 
  * The approved housing body (AHB) number, if a housing association 
  * The name and PPS number of each tenant 
  * A description of the property (for example, a 2-reception, 3-bedroom semi-detached house) 
  * The date the tenancy started 
  * The rent and how often it is paid 
  * The local authority area the property is in 
  * The term of the lease if it is a fixed-term lease 
  * If it is a sub-letting 
  * The [ Building Energy Rating (BER) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/) if applicable 
  * Details of any management company or authorised agent 

The RTB website has [ a checklist of the information you need to provide when
registering a tenancy ](https://www.rtb.ie/register-a-tenancy/how-to-register-
a-tenancy) .

The RTB needs additional information when registering student-specific
accommodation, so it uses a slightly different process. For more information
about registering student-specific accommodation see the [ RTB’s website
](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/registrations/student-
specific-accommodation) .

###  Telling the RTB about changes to rent

If the amount of rent changes, the landlord must tell the RTB of the change
within one month. Read more in our document on [ rent increases
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-
increases-in-private-rented-housing/) .

The RTB can take action against landlords who do not notify the RTB about
changes in rent.

##  How do I know if my tenancy is registered?

You can view the [ public register ](https://www.rtb.ie/about-rtb/news/rtb-
publishes-q2-2022-rent-index) to check that your tenancy has been registered.
The RTB can take action against landlords who do not register tenancies. Read
more on the [ RTB’s website ](https://www.rtb.ie/register-a-tenancy/why-
register/penalties-for-not-registering) .

Even if your landlord hasn’t registered your tenancy, you can still use the [
RTB’s dispute resolution service ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/) . Landlords can only use
this service if they have registered the tenancy.

##  How much does it cost to register?

The fees for registering a tenancy with the RTB are different depending on the
type of tenancy. For example, the fee to register an AHB tenancy is different
to the fee to register a private rented tenancy. There are certain exemptions
from annual registration fees, see below.

###  Registration fees for private, student-specific and cost rental tenancies

The basic fee for registering a private rented, student-specific or cost
rental tenancy with the RTB is €40 a year. This applies if the RTB gets the
completed application within a month of the start of the tenancy. There is a
late fee of €10 per month for each month that the registration is late.

If you are registering up to 10 tenancies in the same building at the same
time, you can pay a combined fee of €170, if you register on time.

###  Registration fees for approved housing bodies (AHBs)

The standard fee for registering an AHB tenancy is €20 a year. This rate
applies if the tenancy is registered within a month of the start of the
tenancy. There is a late fee of €5 per month for each month that the
registration is late.

If you are registering up to 10 AHB tenancies in the same building you can pay
a combined fee of €85, if you register them on time.

###  Late fees

If you are late registering a tenancy, late fees apply for each month that the
registration is late.

**Late fees resumed since 1 March 2024**

Late fees were paused for a period because there were issues registering
tenancies using the new annual registration system. The charging of late fees
restarted on 1 March 2024.

Late fees will not be applied for the period when annual registration late
fees were initially introduced and then paused.

The [ RTB has more information about how the recommencement of late fees
applies to upcoming and late registrations since 1 March 2024
](https://www.rtb.ie/about-rtb/news/recommencing-the-charging-of-late-fees-
from-the-1st-of-march-2024-guide) .

For more information about late registration fees [ see rtb.ie
](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/registrations/unregistered-
tenancies) .

###  Exemptions from annual registration fees

There is no fee if you have to register a new tenancy for rented accommodation
that has already been registered in the last 12 months. This only applies if
you register the new tenancy within a month of the start of the tenancy.

Before annual registration, tenancies were registered each time a new tenancy
began. For example, when new tenants moved in under a new lease. An ongoing
tenancy was also re-registered after 6 years. This is known as a ‘ [ Further
Part 4 ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/types-of-tenancy#lef263) ’ tenancy.

There is a temporary exemption from annual registration fees for landlords who
have ‘Further Part 4’ tenancies. This means they do not have to pay annual
registration fees for the time remaining on their ‘Further Part 4’ tenancy.
So, if there are 3 years left on a ‘Further Part 4’ tenancy, the landlord does
not have to pay annual registration fees for those 3 years. The tenancy must
still be registered annually.

This temporary annual registration fee waiver is set out in the [ Residential
Tenancies (Amendment) Act 2021
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2021/act/39/enacted/en/print.html) .

For more information on annual registration and the temporary fee exemption,
see the [ RTB’s website ](https://www.rtb.ie/annual-registration) and their [
Annual Registration Guidance for Landlords and Tenants (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/general/Annual_Registration_Guidance_for_Landlords_and_Tenants_Final_Version_3_05.04.2022.pdf)
.

###  Penalties for not registering a tenancy with the RTB

Landlords who do not register a tenancy can be fined up to €4,000 and face
imprisonment for up to 6 months on conviction. A further penalty of €250 for
each day of non-registration can be applied. In addition, the landlord will
also have to pay the RTB's legal costs. Read more about these penalties on the
[ RTB’s website ](https://onestopshop.rtb.ie/register-a-tenancy/why-
register/penalties-for-not-registering/) .

###  Information sharing

The RTB can share information with local authorities, which enforce the
regulations relating to [ standards ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-
rights-and-responsibilities/minimum-standards-for-rented-homes/) and [ rent
books ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-
books/) . It can also share information with the [ Department of Social
Protection ](http://www.welfare.ie/) and the [ Revenue Commissioners
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/index.html) .

##  How to register a tenancy with the RTB

You can register a tenancy online or by post or email.

You register online using [ the RTB’s online system
](https://www.rtb.ie/portal) . You need to create an RTB online account before
you can register a tenancy. You can get [ information on the RTB’s website
about how to do this ](https://www.rtb.ie/info-hub) . If you need to create an
online account for an approved housing body (AHB) you should contact [
AHB@rtb.ie ](mailto:AHB@rtb.ie) .

To register a tenancy by post or email download the [ Tenancy Registration
Application Form (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/forms/RTB_form_Tenancy_Reg_Application_%28RTB1%29_June_2022_%282%29.pdf)
, complete it and send it back to the RTB. You can return it by post to the
RTB’s address below or email it to [ registrations@rtb.ie
](mailto:registrations@rtb.ie) . You should keep a copy of the form and proof
of postage.

There is a different process for registering tenancies in student-specific
accommodation. See the [ RTB’s website ](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-
compliance/registrations/student-specific-accommodation) for information on
how to do this.

If you have questions about the registration process you can email [
registrations@rtb.ie ](mailto:registrations@rtb.ie) .

When a tenancy has been registered and the fees paid the RTB will send letters
to the landlord and tenants confirming that the tenancy has been registered.

###  Residential Tenancies Board

PO Box 47  
Clonakilty  
Co. Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 9am to 5pm

**Tel:** 0818 303 037 or 01 702 8100

**Fax:** 0818 303 039

**Homepage:** [ http://www.rtb.ie/ ](http://www.rtb.ie/)

To access Threshold's housing advice and support services for tenants:

###  Threshold

21 Stoneybatter  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Mon-Fri 9.30 am - 5 pm

**Tel:** 1800 454 454

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advice@threshold.ie ](mailto:advice@threshold.ie)

###  Threshold

22 South Mall  
Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Mon - Fri: 9 am to 1 pm and 2 pm to 5 pm

**Tel:** (021) 427 8848

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advicecork@threshold.ie ](mailto:advicecork@threshold.ie)

###  Threshold

5 Prospect Hill  
Galway  
Ireland  
H91 HC1H

**Opening Hours:** Mon-Fri 9.30 am - 5 pm

**Tel:** (091) 563 080

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advicegalway@threshold.ie ](mailto:advicegalway@threshold.ie)

_**Page edited:** 19 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/registering-a-
tenancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Registering%20a%20tenancy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/registering-a-
tenancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/registering-a-
tenancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Registering%20a%20tenancy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/registering-a-
tenancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residential Tenancies Board_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-disputes/residential-tenancies-board/)

The Residential Tenancies Board maintains a register of private rented
tenancies and approved housing body tenancies and provides a dispute
resolution service.

1383.8557

  * [ _Registering a death_ ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/registering-a-death/)

Every death that takes place in Ireland must be recorded and registered. Find
how to register a death and how to get a death certificate.

944.6105

  * [ _Registering a political party in Ireland_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/running-for-office/registering-a-political-party/)

How to register a political party in Ireland.

904.69464

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

