**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Help with buying a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/) > Help to Buy Scheme

#  Help to Buy Scheme

  * What is the Help to Buy Scheme? 
  * Do I qualify for the Help to Buy Scheme? 
  * Does my new home qualify for the Help to Buy Scheme? 
  * How much can I claim? 
  * Can Revenue ask me to repay the Help to Buy payment? 
  * How to apply 
  * Further information 

##  What is the Help to Buy Scheme?

The Help to Buy (HTB) Scheme helps first-time buyers purchase a newly-built
house or apartment. You can also get it for once-off self-build homes. It only
applies to properties that cost €500,000 or less.

The Help to Buy Scheme gives a refund of the [ income tax ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/) and [ Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT) ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-tax/) you
have paid in Ireland for the 4 years before the year you apply.

The HTB Scheme was increased in July 2020. This increase is known as the
Enhanced Help to Buy Scheme. The Enhanced Help to Buy Scheme is available
until 31 December 2024.

###  **Budget 2024**

In [ Budget 2024 ](/en/money-and-tax/budgets/budget-2024/) , the Enhanced Help
to Buy Scheme was extended to 31 December 2025. The scheme was also amended to
allow applicants using the Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme to buy
their home to qualify for the Help to Buy Scheme. This came into effect on 11
October 2023.

##  Do I qualify for the Help to Buy Scheme?

###  About your property ownership

To qualify you must be a first-time buyer who buys or self-builds a new
residential property between **1 January 2017** and **31 December 2025.** (The
scheme was available if you bought or built a home between 19 July 2016 and 31
December 2016, but you had to claim it before 31/12/2019).

If you are buying or building the property with someone else, they must also
be a first-time buyer.

You will not qualify if:

  * You have previously bought or built a house or apartment, either by yourself or with someone else. This applies even if you are now separated or divorced from that person and have given up your interest in the property. 
  * You have owned a home abroad 
  * You don't plan on living in the property as your main home for at least 5 years after buying or building it (HTB is not available for investment properties) 
  * You have not taken out a mortgage for the property 

If you have inherited or been gifted a property and you want to buy or build a
new property, you may still qualify for HTB as long as you meet all the other
conditions of the scheme. Contact [ Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) if you have questions about
this.

###  About your mortgage

To qualify, you must [ take out a mortgage ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-
with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) with a qualifying lender. The
mortgage must be at least 70% of:

  * The purchase value of the property if you are buying a newly built home. The purchase value is normally the price you pay for the property. However, if the purchase price is less than the market value, the purchase value will be the market value. 
  * The valuation approved by the mortgage provider, if you are building your home. The approved valuation is the valuation of the property at the time you take out the mortgage. 

This is known as the _loan to value ratio_ .

You are allowed to have a guarantor on the loan. A guarantor is someone who
agrees to have the responsibility to pay your mortgage if you don't or can't
pay it. For example, your guarantor could be a parent or close relative. If
you have a guarantor on the loan, they do not have to be a first-time buyer.

####  Your mortgage and shared equity schemes

If you are getting help to buy your home with a shared equity scheme like the
[ First Home Scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/first-
home-scheme/) or the [ Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/local-authority-
affordable-purchase-scheme/) , this funding is not considered when calculating
the loan to value ratio for the HTB Scheme. Only your mortgage amount is
considered.

For example, if you are buying a home that costs €365,000 and have been
approved for a mortgage of €224,000 and have equity funding of €73,000, you
will not qualify for HTB. The equity funding is not considered when
calculating the LTV, so your LTV is 61% based on your mortgage. This means you
have not reached the 70% minimum LTV requirement and do not qualify for HTB.

With the Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme, you must also remember to
use the market value of the property and not the reduced purchase price when
calculating if your mortgage qualifies for HTB.

###  Tax requirements

You must meet certain tax requirements to qualify for the scheme.

  * You must be fully tax compliant for 4 years immediately before your claim 
  * You will need to complete online form 12 (PAYE) and Form 11 (self-assessed) for each of those 4 years. You must also pay any outstanding taxes that are due. 
  * You must be registered for Revenue’s online [ myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/register.html?execution=e1s1) service, if you pay tax through PAYE 
  * You must be registered for Revenue Online Service [ ROS ](http://www.ros.ie/PublisherServlet/info/setupnewcust) , if you are a self-assessed taxpayer 

##  Does my new home qualify for the Help to Buy Scheme?

Your new home must meet certain criteria to qualify for the Help to Buy
scheme.

  * The property you buy or build must be a new residential property. It must never have been used, or have been suitable for use, as a residential property before. If the property was non-residential before, but has been converted for residential use, it may qualify for HTB. 
  * If you are buying a new home, the market value of the property must be €500,000 or less. In most cases the market value is the price you pay for the property. However, if the price has been subsidised, for example, if you are buying a home from your local authority under the Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme, you must use the market value. 
  * If you are building your home, the approved valuation of your home must be €500,000 or less. The valuation is approved by your mortgage provider and is valued at the time the mortgage is entered into. It includes the cost of the site. 
  * If you are buying your new home, the contractor or developer you buy it from must be approved by Revenue. Revenue has a [ list of approved developers and contractors ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/documents/htb-qualifying-contractors.pdf) , so you can check that they are approved. 
  * If you are building your own home, you will need a solicitor (registered with Revenue as a ‘HTB approver’) to verify your HTB claim 
  * You must live in the property for at least 5 years from the date that it is habitable 

You will have to pay the HTB payment back if you do not live there for 5
years. For more on this, see ‘Can Revenue ask me to repay the Help to Buy
payment?’ below.

##  How much can I claim?

###  Enhanced Help to Buy Scheme

The maximum amount available was temporarily increased in 2020 and applies
until 31 December 2025.

If you sign a contract for a new house, or draw down on a self-build mortgage,
between **23 July 2020** and **31 December 2025** , you can get the increased
relief.

You can claim relief on **the lesser of** :

  * €30,000 
  * 10% of the market value of a new build property 
  * 10% of the approved valuation of a self-build property 
  * The amount of income tax and DIRT you paid for the 4 years before the year you apply. (You cannot claim relief on PRSI or USC). 

The maximum payment is €30,000 per qualifying property under the enhanced
scheme. This cap applies regardless of how many people are involved in buying
the property.

You can read more about the [ Enhanced Help to Buy Scheme on Revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/help-to-buy-incentive/how-much-can-you-
claim.aspx) .

###  Original Help to Buy Scheme

If you signed a contract for a new house, or drew down on a self-build
mortgage between **1 January 2017** and **22 July 2020** , you qualify for the
original relief.

You can claim relief on **the lesser of** :

  * €20,000 
  * 5% of the market value of a new build property 
  * 5% of the approved valuation of a self-build property 
  * The amount of income tax and DIRT you paid in the 4 years before the year you apply 

The maximum payment is €20,000 per qualifying property under the original
scheme. This cap applies regardless of how many people are involved in buying
the property.

**Differences between the Original HTB Scheme and Enhanced HTB Scheme** **Market value or valuation** |  **1 January 2017 to 22 July 2020** |  **23 July 2020 to 31 December 2025**  
---|---|---  
**Up to €500,000** |  Relief of up to 5% of purchase price, **or** 5% of approved valuation, **or** €20,000  |  Relief of up to 10% of purchase price, **or** 10% of approved valuation, **or** €30,000   
**Over €500,000** |  No relief  |  No relief   
  
##  Can Revenue ask me to repay the Help to Buy payment?

You will have to repay Revenue some or all of your Help to Buy payment in
certain situations. This is called clawback.

You have to pay the HTB payment back to Revenue if you:

  * Do not live in the home for at least 5 years 
  * Do not complete the purchase of the home 
  * Do not finish building the home 
  * Were not entitled to the payment in the first place 

If you do not live in the home for 5 years, the amount you must repay depends
on how long you lived there.

This table shows how much you have to repay depending on how long you lived in
the home.

HTB applies to houses and apartments, so better to say home to cover this.

**Number of years** **** **living in the home** |  **% of clawback**  
---|---  
1  |  100%   
2  |  80%   
3  |  60%   
4  |  40%   
5  |  20%   
  
There are some exceptions to this. For example, if you bought or built the
home with another first-time buyer and you want to move out, but they want to
stay for at least 5 years, you will not have to repay the HTB.

There is also an exception if you need to relocate temporarily for work. Find
out more about this in Revenue’s [ Help to Buy guidance (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-tax-capital-gains-
tax-corporation-tax/part-15/15-01-46.pdf) .

**Can Revenue ask my contractor to repay the Help to Buy payment?**

Your qualifying contractor will have to repay the HTB payment if:

  * You have not bought the home within 2 years of the contractor getting the HTB payment 
  * Revenue thinks you will not purchase the home within 2 years of the contractor getting the HTB payment 

In certain cases, Revenue will be flexible about this. For example, if the
home is almost finished after 2 years and is likely to be completed shortly.

##  How to apply

There are 3 stages to the online application process:

  1. The application stage 
  2. The claim stage 
  3. The verification stage 

###  Application stage

If you are a PAYE employee only, you can apply for the Help to Buy Scheme
through Revenue’s [ myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-
web/register.html?execution=e1s1) service.

If you are a self-assessed taxpayer, you can apply through [ Revenue’s Online
Service (ROS) ](http://www.ros.ie/PublisherServlet/info/setupnewcust) .

You will also need access to [ MyEnquiries
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/online/myenquiries.html) , a secure method of
corresponding with Revenue.

  * If you are a ROS business user, you can access MyEnquiries from your My Services screen under ‘Other Services’ 
  * If you are a PAYE employee only, you can access MyEnquiries through myAccount 

If you are tax compliant, your application will be approved and you will be
given a summary of the maximum amount you can claim.

###  Claim stage

Once your application is approved you can make your claim using ROS or
MyAccount. You will need to provide documents about your mortgage and confirm
details about the property at this stage. Revenue has a [ Help to Buy –
Summary Guide for Applicants
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/documents/htb-summary-applicants.pdf)
which has detailed information about what documents you will need and how to
make your claim.

###  Verification stage

The information you have provided is verified by an eligible verifier. This is
the contractor if you are buying a new home, or your solicitor if you are
building your home.

You can get full details of the process from [ Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/help-to-buy-incentive/how-do-you-apply-
for-help-to-buy-htb.aspx) .

###  How do I get the refund?

If you buy a new build, the refund is paid directly to the contractor. If you
self-build the property, the refund is paid to a bank account you hold with
your loan provider.

##  Further information

Read more about the Help to Buy Scheme and how to apply on [ revenue.ie
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/it/reliefs/htb/index.html) . You can also read
Revenue’s [ Summary Guide (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/documents/htb-summary-applicants.pdf) for
full details on the HTB process.

_**Page edited:** 11 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Help%20to%20Buy%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Help%20to%20Buy%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Help to go home for migrants in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/help-to-go-home-for-migrants-in-ireland/)

The voluntary return programme helps undocumented migrants and people who
don’t have permission to remain in Ireland to return home.

1237.5876

  * [ _Financial help with going to school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/financial-help-with-school/)

There are several schemes to help with the costs of going to school.

1172.1827

  * [ _Help with the cost of living_ ](/en/money-and-tax/cost-of-living/help-with-cost-of-living/)

This page has advice on some of the supports that are available and
information about how you can manage your money.

1075.4928

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

