**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Local
authority and social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/) > Applying for social housing

#  Applying for social housing

  * What is social housing? 
  * What are the main rules when applying for social housing? 
  * Do I qualify for social housing supports? 
  * How do I apply for social housing? 
  * What happens to my social housing application next? 

##  What is social housing?

Social housing is housing provided by local authorities and [ approved housing
bodies (AHBs) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-
and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) for people who cannot afford to
buy a home or rent accommodation privately. Social housing is allocated
according to your eligibility and need. The rent you pay is based on your
household’s ability to pay.

##  What are the main rules when applying for social housing?

There are rules about how local authorities manage social housing
applications. They include a number of important elements, such as:

  * You can only apply to one housing authority 
  * You must already be living in the area covered by that housing authority, or have a [ local connection ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2011/si/84/made/en/print) with the area (though a housing authority may agree to waive this requirement) 
  * You will only be considered for social housing if your household income is less than the threshold that applies in the housing authority’s area 

These rules are set-out in the [ Social Housing Assessment Regulations
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/ResultsSITitle.html?q=Social+Housing+Assessment+Regulations+&=&=)
.

##  Do I qualify for social housing supports?

###  **1\. You must have a have a long-term right to remain in Ireland**

To qualify, you must have a **legal right to remain in the State** on a long-
term basis.

This means that people who have temporary protection, such as Ukrainians
fleeing the war, cannot apply for social housing. This is because their right
to remain in Ireland is not long-term.

If you are in this situation, our [ Coming to Ireland from Ukraine
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine/#4583cd)
page has information about accommodation and social welfare supports for you.

The rules about access to social housing supports for non-Irish nationals are
available in [ Circular Housing 41/2012.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/circular/42023-circular-housing-412012-access-to-
social-housing-supports-for-non-irish-nationals/)

###  **2\. You must be eligible**

You must then be **eligible** for social housing, and you must be **in need
of** social housing.

  * The housing authority will assess your eligibility 
  * If you are eligible, they will then assess if you need social housing 

To be eligible for social housing you must:

  * Meet the income criteria 
  * Show that you do not have suitable alternative accommodation 

####  **What is the income criteria for social housing?**

The [ Household Means Policy ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fb1f2-social-
housing-support-household-means-policy/) provides details of how your
household income is assessed by local authorities for social housing support.
It includes information about what income is taken into account and what
income is disregarded (not taken into account). For example, certain social
welfare payments are not considered in these assessments.

There are 3 maximum income limits that apply to different housing authorities.

**Basic maximum income limits per area** **Areas** |  **Maximum net income limits for a single person**  
---|---  
Cork City, Dublin City, Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown, Fingal, Galway City, Co Meath, South Dublin, Co Kildare, Co Wicklow  |  €40,000   
Co Carlow, Co Clare, Co Cork, Co Galway, Co Kerry, Co Kilkenny, Co Laois, Limerick City and County, Co Louth, Waterford City and County, Co Westmeath, Co Wexford  |  €35,000   
Co Cavan, Co Donegal, Co Leitrim, Co Longford, Co Mayo, Co Monaghan, Co Offaly, Co Roscommon, Co Sligo, Co Tipperary  |  €30,000   
  
These are the maximum net income limits for a single person. These limits are
increased if there are other members of your household. You get an additional:

  * 5% of the basic maximum income limit for every adult member of the household. This is up to a maximum of 10% or 2 additional adults. 
  * 2.5% of the basic maximum income limit for every child in the household 

The local authority looks at your household’s average net income for the 12
months before they received your application when assessing if your household
meets the income criteria. Net income is the amount you are left with once
income tax, Universal Social Charge, [ Additional Superannuation Contribution
(ASC) (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/7407/5ee8f7cf2f9e4030b65144424aae4a1d.pdf)
and PRSI are deducted from your income.

The Department provide guidance notes to local authorities with further
details about assessing income for social housing support. For example, these
guidance notes state that savings are only relevant to the income assessment
if they generate an income for applicants, by way of dividend or interest.

If you are looking for information about any income you have that is not
included in the Household Means Policy you should contact your local
authority.

####  **What is considered alternative accommodation?**

You will be considered as having alternative accommodation if you or a member
of your household has property that you could reasonably be expected to use to
meet your housing needs. This property will be considered alternative
accommodation if you could live in it, or sell it and use the money to pay for
suitable accommodation. Alternative property includes property you own abroad,
or property that you are renting out. Under residential tenancies legislation
you can [ terminate the tenancy ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-
and-responsibilities/if-your-landlord-wants-you-to-leave/) if your household
needs the property to live in.

A property will not be regarded as alternative accommodation if it:

  * Is occupied by someone who is divorced or separated* from a member of the household, or whose civil partnership with a household member has been dissolved 
  * Would be overcrowded if the household lived in it 
  * Is unfit for human habitation 
  * Would not adequately meet the accommodation requirements of a household member with a disability 

* A couple does not have to be [ judicially separated ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/judicial-separation/) in order for this to apply. A deed of separation is sufficient – see our document on [ separation agreements ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-agreement/) . 

###  3\. You must need social housing

When deciding if your household needs social housing, the housing authority
considers:

  * Is your current accommodation an institution, emergency accommodation or hostel? 
  * Are you homeless within the meaning of [ section 2 of the Housing Act 1988 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1988/act/28/section/2/enacted/en/html) ? 
  * Is your current accommodation overcrowded? 
  * Is it fit for human habitation? 
  * Does it meet the accommodation requirements of a household member with a disability? 
  * Is it unsuitable for your household’s adequate housing on exceptional medical or compassionate grounds? 
  * If it is shared with another household, have you a reasonable requirement for separate accommodation? 
  * Has your household’s current mortgage been classified as unsustainable as part of the [ Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-process/) ? 
  * Is your household dependent on [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) to meet its housing need? 
  * Is your current accommodation unsuitable because it does not adequately house your household in any other way, having regard to particular household circumstances? 

##  How do I apply for social housing?

To apply for local authority housing, download an application form from [ your
local authority's ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-
authorities/) website, or contact your local authority's housing department
and ask for an application form. An [ Easy to Read Guide (pdf)
](https://www.housingagency.ie/sites/default/files/2022-03/Easy%20to%20Read%20Guide%20to%20Filling%20in%20the%20Social%20Housing%20Support%20Application%20Form%202022%20FINAL.pdf)
to filling in the application form is also available.

You will need to provide additional documentation with your application form.
For example, you need to include photo identification, proof of address and
proof of income. There is more information about proof of income below.

You no longer need to get a HPL1 form stamped by Revenue when completing your
social housing application, as the local authority now checks this information
directly with Revenue. The application form has a checklist that includes
details of all additional documents you need.

###  What documents do I need for proof of income?

You need to provide proof of your income with your application when applying
for social housing to show that you meet the income criteria. The documents
you need are different depending on whether you are employed, self-employed or
getting a social welfare payment.

**If you are getting a social welfare payment** , you will need a statement
from the Department of Social Protection detailing all your social welfare
payments over the previous 12 months.

**If you are self-employed** , you will need to provide at least 2 years’
accounts with an auditor’s report, and a notice of assessment and/or a self-
assessment acknowledgement letter for the previous 12 months.

**If you are employed** , you will need evidence of your income for the
previous 12 months. You can use the following documents to provide proof of
your household income from last year and your household’s current income:

  * **Proof of income for last year:** Last year's Statement of Liability (formerly P21) and Employment Detail Summary (formerly P60). These are both available from Revenue. You can use [ Revenue’s online service, myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/sign_in.html?execution=e1s1) to access these documents. See our pages on how to get your [ Statement of Liability ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-review-your-tax-for-PAYE-taxpayers#l07617) and [ Employment Detail Summary ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/no-p45-no-p60#l7e30a) for more information. 
  * **Proof of current income:** Payslips or a Pay and Tax Summary for the current tax year up to the date you apply. The Pay and Tax Summary is available from Revenue. 

**Note** : If you pay an [ Additional Superannuation Contribution (ASC) (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/7407/5ee8f7cf2f9e4030b65144424aae4a1d.pdf) , you must
also provide the previous year’s last payslip and your most recent payslip.
ASCs only apply to people in public service pension schemes.

[ If you are not registered for Revenue’s myAccount ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-review-your-tax-for-PAYE-taxpayers#l86e29) , or if
you are having difficulty getting any of these documents online, you can
contact your local tax office for help or to get a paper version.

###  Picking areas of choice

You can specify up to 3 areas where you would choose to live. At least one of
them must be in the area administered by the housing authority that you apply
to (its _functional area_ ) and the others must be either in that functional
area or within the same county. If you do not live in or have a connection
with the housing authority’s own functional area, but the authority has agreed
to accept an application from you, you can only pick areas of choice within
that particular authority’s functional area.

###  Applying for AHB or accessible social housing

If you want to be considered for accommodation provided by a [ housing
association ](http://icsh.ie/content/search-for-members) or other approved
housing body, tick the box marked 'approved housing body' on the application
form. Some housing associations may accept direct applications.

If you are a wheelchair user or need accessible accommodation you should tick
the box marked ‘wheelchair liveable accommodation’ in the section of the form
that asks about your housing requirements. There is a supporting Disability or
Medical Information Form (HMD Form) for people applying for social housing
with a medical or disability need.

###  **Applying for disability or medical priority**

If you have a disability or medical condition, you may be prioritised on your
local authority’s housing list. There is a supporting [ Disability or Medical
Information Form (HMD Form)
](https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2023-11/hmd-form.pdf) for
people applying for social housing with a medical or disability need.

The form has 3 separate parts.

  * You complete [ Part 1 of the form ](https://kildarecoco.ie/Forms/Housing/HMDForm%201%20Part%201.pdf)
  * Your healthcare professional completes [ Part 2 of the form ](https://kildarecoco.ie/Forms/Housing/HMDForm%201%20Part%202.pdf)
  * Another healthcare professional completes [ Part 3 of the form ](https://kildarecoco.ie/Forms/Housing/HMDForm%201%20Part%203.pdf)

The 3 parts of the form should then be submitted to your local authority
together.

This is a standardised form that you can get from [ your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

###  Getting help to fill out the form

If you need help filling out the application form, or are unsure how to answer
the questions or where to get your supporting documents, you can contact [
your local Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for help. Your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) can also check
that your form is fully completed and you have all your supporting documents
before you submit your application.

##  What happens to my social housing application next?

The local authority has 12 weeks from receiving your completed application
form to assess it and make a decision on whether you qualify for social
housing or not. This timeframe can be extended if the local authority needs
additional information, which they will request from you. You must submit the
additional information in the required timeframe, or your application may be
refused.

###  If your application is accepted

If you are accepted by the housing authority as being eligible for and in need
of housing, you are placed on its housing list or _record of qualified
households_ . It will also notify any other housing authority in whose
functional area you have specified an area of choice.

If you are in private rented accommodation while you are on the housing list,
you may be able to get [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) . If you are getting the [ Housing
Assistance Payment (HAP) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-
renting/housing-assistance-payment/) , which is legally defined as a form of
social housing support, you will no longer be on the housing list.

However, if you apply for a transfer from HAP to another form of social
housing **within 2 weeks of getting the letter confirming your HAP payment** ,
any time that you spent on the housing list can be taken into account when
your local authority considers your application.

[ Read more about social housing waiting lists and the allocation process.
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-
lists/)

###  If your application is not accepted

If your application is not accepted, the local authority should give you the
reasons for their decision. If it does not, you can apply to see your file
under [ Freedom of Information ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/standards-and-accountability/freedom-of-information/) .

If you want to challenge the local authority’s decision, you can appeal it
with them. Each local authority has their own internal appeal process for
dealing with appeals.

If you are not happy with the outcome of the internal review you can make a
complaint to the Ombudsman. The [ Office of the Ombudsman ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-
ombudsman/) investigates complaints about local authorities and other public
bodies. You must make your complaint within 12 months of the local authority’s
decision. The Ombudsman will investigate your complaint and make a decision
and recommendations on the issue. They may ask the local authority to review
its decision, change its decision, or provide an explanation or compensation.

You can also appeal the local authority’s decision in court. Generally, this
is done by applying to the High Court for [ judicial review of the decision of
the local authority ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/standards-and-accountability/judicial-review-public-decisions/) .

###  If you get a local authority home

Local authority rents are based on a system called differential rents. This
means the rent is based on your ability to pay, so if your income is low, your
rent will be low; and if your income increases, your rent will increase also.
The income of any other adult members of your household will be included in
the rent calculation and there may be deductions for any children in your
family. Each local authority operates its own rent scheme. Contact [ your
local authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/)
for the details of their differential rent scheme.

Your local authority may have a minimum or maximum rent, which may depend on
the size of your home. There is also a hardship clause that gives local
authorities discretion to reduce the rent if there are particular reasons to
do this.

If your income or the income of anyone in your household changes, you must
inform the local authority, so that it can recalculate your rent.  

Local authority housing is unfurnished. If you are offered a local authority
home and you do not have and cannot afford to buy furniture or appliances, you
may be eligible for [ help under the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme
](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/additional-needs-payment/)
.

_**Page edited:** 14 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Applying%20for%20social%20housing&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Applying%20for%20social%20housing&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Improvement Works in Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/improvement-works-in-lieu-of-local-authority-housing/)

Local authorities may improve or extend privately owned houses as an
alternative to providing local authority housing.

1630.3011

  * [ _How to support or object to a planning application with a local authority_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/commenting-on-planning-application/)

It is possible for anyone to support or object to a planning application with
a local authority. Find out how to make a submission or observation.

1432.6882

  * [ _Housing and other supports for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)

Housing and other supports for homeless people.

1395.3778

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

