**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) > [ Housing
supports for older people and people with disabilities ](/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/) > Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability

#  Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability

  * What is the Housing Adaptation Grantfor People with a Disability? 
  * What does the grant cover? 
  * How much is the grant? 
  * Do I qualify for the grant? 
  * How do I apply? 
  * What happens after I send my application? 
  * Getting the work done 
  * Other grants and schemes 

##  What is the Housing Adaptation Grantfor People with a Disability?

The Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability is a grant for
people with a physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual disability. It
provides funding so you can improve how you enter and move around your home.

##  What does the grant cover?

You can use this grant to make your home more accessible by:

  * Adding ramps or other ways to access your home 
  * Extending your home to create more space, for example, adding a downstairs bedroom 
  * Adding accessible bathroom facilities, such as an accessible shower or a ground-floor bathroom or toilet 
  * Installing a stair lift 
  * Installing grab rails 
  * Installing a fixed track hoist. (This is a ceiling or wall-mounted track with a sling attached to it, which means you can be mechanically lifted and moved to different places along the track). 

The grant does not cover VAT on the work. However, you can apply to Revenue
for a [ VAT refund ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-
with-disabilities/vat-refunds-on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-
disabilities/) for any appliances that you need and the cost of installing
them.

##  How much is the grant?

The maximum grant you can get is €30,000 or 95% of the cost of the work
(whichever is less). The amount of money you get depends on your household
income for the previous tax year.

If your household income is less than €30,000, you may get 95% of the cost of
the works up to the maximum grant amount of €30,000.

If your house is less than 12 months old, the grant will not be more than
€14,500.

As household income increases, the percentage of the costs paid by the grant
gradually reduce from 95% to 30%. So, if you have a household income of
between €50,001 and €60,000, you will qualify for 30% of the costs.

You may not get the maximum grant, even if you qualify for it. This is because
the grant is paid by your local authority and depends on what funding they
have available. They will decide whether they can pay you the full grant, or a
percentage of the grant.

You will not get a grant if your gross annual household income is over
€60,000.

**Grant rates** **Maximum yearly household income** |  **% of costs** |  **Maximum grant for houses built more than 12 months ago** |  **Maximum grant for houses built less than 12 months ago**  
---|---|---|---  
Up to €30,000  |  95%  |  €30,000  |  €14,500   
€30,001 - €35,000  |  85%  |  €25,500  |  €12,325   
€35,001 - €40,000  |  75%  |  €22,500  |  €10,875   
€40,001 - €50,000  |  50%  |  €15,000  |  €7,250   
€50,001 - €60,000  |  30%  |  €9,000  |  €4,350   
Over €60,000  |  |  **No grant** |  **No grant**  
  
##  Do I qualify for the grant?

The grant is available to people with a gross household income of up to
€60,000 a year.

Your local authority will assess your total household to find out:

  * If you qualify for the grant 
  * The level of funding you will get 

###  How is my income assessed?

Your total household income from the **previous tax year** is assessed to find
out if you qualify and how much of a grant you will get.

Household income includes:

  * Your annual gross income (income before tax) 
  * Your spouse or partners annual gross income 
  * The annual gross income of any other adults living in the household who are aged over 23 years if they are in full-time education, or over 18 if they are not in full-time education 

####  Income not taken into account

The following income is not taken into account when calculating your household
income:

  * €5,000 for each member of the household who is under 18 
  * €5,000 for each member of the household who is aged between 18 and 23 and is in full-time education 
  * €5,000 if the person receiving the grant is being cared for by a relative on a full-time basis 
  * [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/)
  * [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)
  * [ Domiciliary Care Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/)
  * [ Carer's Support Grant ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-support-grant/)
  * [ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) and [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) (if the carer's payment is made for the person who needs the grant) 
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
  * [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/)
  * [ Living Alone Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/)
  * Foster Care Grant 

###  Does my home qualify?

Your home qualifies if it is:

  * Privately owned (you or your family own it) 
  * Rented from a landlord and you have the landlord’s permission to make the changes. (The tenancy must also be registered with the Residential Tenancies Board). 
  * Provided by an approved housing body (AHB) 
  * A communal residence (accommodation where people live together in group homes) 

**You must live in the property as your primary home when the work is
completed.**

###  What tax information do I need for the grant?

Your tax affairs and [ Local Property Tax (LPT) ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax/) must be in order to
qualify for the grant.

You will also need to get tax clearance from Revenue, if you get a grant of
more than €10,000. [ You can apply for tax clearance online or by post
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-clearance-certificate#ld1a9a) .

##  How do I apply?

Download an [ application form (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/119595/fb68af61-2429-414e-8f61-95ddc380f8ec.pdf) or
contact your local authority and ask for one to be posted to you.

The form has a section that must be completed and signed by a doctor.

You may also need professional advice from a building contractor when filling
in the section about the work you want to get done and how much you think it
will cost.

Send the completed form to your local authority along with any documents that
are needed, such as:

  * Proof of your household income for the previous tax year 
  * Proof that the [ Local Property Tax (LPT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax/) for the home is in order 
  * A letter from the landlord giving you permission to get the work done, if you are renting 
  * An occupational therapist's (OT) report if you are using the grant to add an extension, get a stair lift or make a big change to how a room is being used. 

The local authority can arrange for the OT assessment, or you can employ an OT
yourself and get up to €250 of the cost from the local authority as part of
the grant. You can [ search for an OT on the website of the Association of
Occupational Therapists Ireland ](https://www.aoti.ie/) .

The [ application form
](https://assets.gov.ie/119595/fb68af61-2429-414e-8f61-95ddc380f8ec.pdf) gives
full details of the documents you will need as proof.

##  What happens after I send my application?

When your local authority receives your application, they will:

  * Check your application and see if you qualify for the grant 
  * Send a technician to visit your home to make sure that it is possible to do the work and that the adaptations are suitable for your needs 
  * Contact you to let you know if your application has been approved and how much you have been approved for 
  * Ask you to send them a quote for the work, your contractor’s tax reference number and your bank account details 

###  How are applications prioritised?

Your application is prioritised according to how urgent your medical needs
are. There are 3 levels of priority.

**Priority 1** is given to people who:

  * Are terminally ill or are dependent on family or a carer 
  * Would be able to return home from hospital or residential care if they had the adaptations to their home 

**Priority 2** is given to people who:

  * Are mobile but need help to access their bedroom or bathroom 
  * Find it harder to be independent without the adaptations 

**Priority 3** is given to people who are independent but need adaptations to
improve their quality of life.

###  What if my application is unsuccessful?

If your application for the grant is unsuccessful or if you are unhappy with
the [ local authority’s ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-
authorities/) decision, you can appeal the decision.

You must appeal to the local authority in writing within 3 weeks of the
decision, explaining why you are appealing.

Someone in the local authority who was not involved in the original assessment
will assess your appeal and contact you with a result. This could take up to 6
weeks.

If your application is unsuccessful or if you need different adaptations to
your home, you may qualify for other grants or schemes, see below.

##  Getting the work done

The grant will not be paid if you start work before you get grant approval.
However, it is expected that the work will start within 6 months of your grant
approval. If this does not happen, the local authority may allow a time
extension. The grant is paid when the work is completed.

The proposed works should include the installation of smoke and carbon
monoxide alarms, if you don't already have them in your home.

###  Choosing a contractor

Before choosing a contractor to do the work you should:

  * Ask friends, family, and neighbours who have done building work recently, for advice and recommendations on contractors 
  * Your local authority may have a list of contractors who work in your area 
  * Get a number of quotes and compare them 
  * Request and check the contractor’s references 
  * Formalise your relationship with your contractor by drawing up a contract detailing the required works, prices, timescales, payment terms and warranties 

###  Getting the work done safely

Under the Regulations governing safety, health and welfare at work, you must
ensure that construction work on your home is carried out by competent people.
Read more, including a [ guide for homeowners (pdf)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Construction/homeowners_guidance.pdf)
and some [ Frequently Asked Questions
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Your_Industry/Construction/Construction_FAQ's/Homeowners_FAQs.html)
, on the website of the [ Health and Safety Authority
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/) .

##  Other grants and schemes

If you do not qualify for the Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a
Disability, or it is not suitable for the work you need to get done, you may
qualify for other grants or schemes.

If you just need basic work to make your home more accessible, you can apply
for the means-tested [ Mobility Aids Grant Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/mobility-aids-grant-scheme/) .

If you are an older person and you need essential repairs to your home, the [
Housing Aid for Older People Grant ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/) may be more suitable for
you. These schemes are administered by local authorities.

[ VAT refunds are available on the cost of aids and appliances ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-
on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-disabilities/) used by people with
disabilities, as well as on the cost of installation and adaptation work.

###  Energy efficiency

If you plan to improve the energy efficiency of your home, you may qualify for
the:

  * [ Better Energy Homes Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-scheme/)
  * [ Better Energy Warmer Homes Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/)
  * [ National Home Energy Upgrade Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)

_**Page edited:** 17 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-
disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Housing%20Adaptation%20Grant%20for%20People%20with%20a%20Disability&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-
disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-
disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Housing%20Adaptation%20Grant%20for%20People%20with%20a%20Disability&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-
disability/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

2093.3325

  * [ _Caring for a child with a disability_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/caring-for-a-child-with-a-disability/)

Find out what supports and services are available to parents, guardians and
carers of children with disabilities

1938.2302

  * [ _Housing Aid for Older People Grant_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/)

Grants are available to improve the homes of older people so that they can
stay in their own homes for as long as possible.

1917.0964

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

