**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Losing your
home and homelessness ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/) >
Youth homelessness

#  Youth homelessness

  * Where to go if you are homeless 
  * What is youth homelessness? 
  * Why do some young people become homeless? 
  * Youth homelessness and the law 
  * What supports are there for young homeless people? 
  * Voluntary organisations and their supports for homeless young people 
  * Government response to youth homelessness 
  * More information 

##  Where to go if you are homeless

If you are under 18 and homeless, or if you know a young person who is
homeless, contact [ Tusla ](http://www.tusla.ie/get-in-touch/local-area-
offices/) or the [ Garda Síochána ](http://www.garda.ie/Stations/Default.aspx)
. They can provide support.

If you are 18 or older, you should contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to get
emergency accommodation.

You can also contact one of the [ organisations working specifically with
homeless people ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-
home-and-homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/) and with homeless young
people.

##  What is youth homelessness?

Youth homelessness describes 13 to 26 year-olds who are living without a
parent or guardian and don’t have stable accommodation.

For example, they may be:

  * Sleeping rough on the streets, or somewhere else that is not meant for night-time accommodation, such as a park, vacant building, shop or bus shelter 
  * Living in temporary accommodation intended for short stays, such as a hostel, shelter or bed and breakfast 
  * Staying temporarily with friends or relatives who can only accommodate them for a short time. This is often known as couch surfing. 

##  Why do some young people become homeless?

Young people can become homeless for many reasons. For example, they may have
to leave their family home due to an issue, such as:

  * A family breakdown 
  * Over-crowding 
  * Conflict 
  * Violence 
  * Abuse 
  * Neglect 
  * Drug or alcohol addiction 
  * Emotional or behavioural problems 
  * Not being accepted because they are LGBTQI 

Young people are also at risk of becoming homeless when they:

  * Leave the [ care system ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-and-the-care-system/)
  * Leave [ prison ](/en/justice/prison-system/being-released-from-prison/) or a [ juvenile detention centre ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/detention-of-children/)
  * Leave the [ direct provision system ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/direct-provision/)
  * Move away from home to study or work 

##  Youth homelessness and the law

The law and the types of services you can access as a young homeless person
are different depending on your age.

###  **If you are homeless and under 18**

If you are under 18, you are considered a minor. This means your parents, or a
guardian are legally responsible for you.

But, if you’ve left home, or it is not safe for you to be there, then [ Tusla
](https://www.tusla.ie/) is legally responsible for your care and welfare.

They will work to find alternative accommodation for you with a guardian, or [
in care ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-
children/children-and-the-care-system/) , such as [ foster care
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-
and-fostering/fostering/) or [ residential care
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/children-in-care/) .

This is set out in the [ Child Care Act 1991
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1991/en/act/pub/0017/index.html) .

####  **If you are a child arriving in Ireland without your family**

If you are a foreign national who is under 18 and you arrive in Ireland
without your parents or a caregiver, you will be referred to Tusla.

Tusla is then responsible for your general care and well-being. You will see a
social worker who will make a care plan for you. You will be placed in foster
care or residential care, and if you qualify, Tusla will [ apply for
international protection ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/applying-
for-refugee-status-in-ireland/) for you.

###  **If you are homeless and 18 or older**

Young people who are 18 and older are not covered by this legislation. This
means no organisation is legally responsible for providing homeless services
to young people aged 18 or older.

However, you can access general homeless services and accommodation in the
same way as adults who are homeless.

Local authorities have a general responsibility to provide housing for adults
who cannot afford it. So, you can contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to access
emergency accommodation.

##  What supports are there for young homeless people?

###  **If you’re under 18**

If you are under 18 and homeless, or you know someone who is, you should
contact [ Tusla ](https://www.tusla.ie/get-in-touch/) for help and to get
accommodation.

If it is outside standard working hours, you should contact the [ Gardaí
](https://www.garda.ie/en/contact-us/station-directory/) and they will contact
the on-duty Tusla social worker for you, so they can find you emergency
accommodation. This is the process the Gardaí follow if they find you sleeping
on the streets.

Tusla will assess your needs and make a care plan for you. This may mean:

  * Going home 
  * Going to stay with relatives 
  * Foster care 
  * Going to [ alternative accommodation ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/)

###  **If you’re over 18**

If you are over 18 and homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless, you should
contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to get
accommodation.

If you are based in Dublin or Cork, the local authorities have [ specialist
placement services you can contact to get accommodation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-
homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/#b2ca1c) .

There are different types of emergency accommodation available, including
hostels, family hubs, and sometimes B&Bs and hotels.

The type of emergency accommodation you get depends on your situation and if
you have children.

We have more information about these housing options, as well as how to access
social welfare payments when you’re homeless, in our page [ housing and other
supports for homeless people
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-
homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/#766ede) .

###  **Tusla aftercare services for people leaving care**

Tusla will provide [ aftercare services
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/after-care/what-are-
aftercare-
services/#:~:text=Aftercare%20services%20are%20for%20all,in%20accredited%20training%20or%20education)
if you are 18 or over and are at risk of youth homelessness when you’re
leaving:

  * Residential care 
  * Foster care 
  * Prison 
  * [ Juvenile detention services ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/detention-of-children/)

These aftercare services focus on helping you learn how to live independently.
Tusla can provide these aftercare services until you are 21, or until you are
23, if you are in education.

####  **Financial supports after you leave care**

You can also get financial supports as part of the Tusla aftercare service.
The [ Aftercare Grant ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/after-
care/tell-me-more-about-the-aftercare-grant/) can help with the cost of a
deposit and getting set-up in your own place. While, the [ Aftercare Allowance
](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/after-care/tell-me-more-
about-financial-support-while-attending-accredited-training-educatio/) is a
weekly payment to help with your costs if you are in training or education.

If you were in Tusla care before you turned 18 and you qualify for [
Jobseeker’s Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) when you are 18, you may get
the [ full rate of the payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/#28a767) instead of the reduced
rates that apply to most young people.

Read more about [ young people leaving care
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/services-
and-supports-for-children/children-in-care/#l53210) in our page [ Children in
care ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-
relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-in-care/#l53210) .

##  Voluntary organisations and their supports for homeless young people

There are many [ organisations that work specifically with people who are
homeless ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-
homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/) .

These organisations may provide [ housing and other supports for homeless
people ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-
homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/) including:

  * Meals 
  * Advice 
  * Support 
  * Hostel or other accommodation 
  * Health services 
  * Education services 

Some of these organisations have specific programmes for young people who are
homeless.

For example:

  * [ Focus Ireland ](https://www.focusireland.ie/) has programmes to prevent young people becoming homeless and to help them to get back into education or training. 
  * The [ Peter McVerry Trust ](https://pmvtrust.ie/) has [ learning centres ](https://pmvtrust.ie/services/prevention/education/learning-centres/) where they provide education programmes to young people who cannot access mainstream education. 

###  **Drop-in services for young homeless people**

Many organisations also run drop-in centres during the day, where you can get
food, advice and support.

For example:

  * Focus Ireland has a [ Youth Extension Service ](https://www.focusireland.ie/get-help/extension/) that provides a safe meeting space. It also has shower and laundry facilities, as well as a youth health clinic. 
  * The Peter McVerry Trust runs a [ Youth Café ](https://pmvtrust.ie/services/prevention/youth-cafe/) on Berkeley St, Dublin 7 which offers food, internet access, laundry and shower facilities. 

##  Government response to youth homelessness

In June 2021, Ireland signed the [ European Platform on Combatting
Homelessness
](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_3044) . This
committed Ireland to work towards ending homelessness by 2030.

This commitment to end homelessness by 2030 is repeated in the Government’s [
housing plan ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ef5ec-housing-for-all-a-new-
housing-plan-for-ireland/) to 2030. This plan aims to address homelessness by
using a housing-led approach, which includes:

  * Expanding [ Housing First ](https://www.housingagency.ie/housing-information/housing-first) . Housing First gives rough sleepers and people who have been homeless for a long-time their own secure accommodation and intensive health supports. 
  * Building more one-bedroom homes 
  * Providing health and mental supports for people who are homeless 
  * Developing more emergency accommodation 
  * Expanding street outreach services 
  * Developing a Youth Homelessness Strategy 

**Youth Homeless Strategy**

The most recent [ Youth Homelessness Strategy
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/69597-youth-homelessness-strategy/) was
launched in 2022. It has 27 actions aimed at:

  * Preventing young people becoming homeless 
  * Improving young people’s experience in emergency accommodation 
  * Assisting young people to exit homelessness 

##  More information

The Housing Agency’s [ Supports Guide for Young People
](https://www.housingagency.ie/sites/default/files/2023-09/The-Housing-Agency-
Youth-Support-Booklet.pdf) is aimed at young people who are homeless or at
risk of homelessness. It gives information on how to access social welfare,
financial, housing, employment, educational and childcare services and
supports.

Spunout has also developed a factsheet with useful information about [ how to
prepare for leaving care ](https://spunout.ie/life/in-care/prepare-for-
leaving-care) .

_**Page edited:** 10 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/youth-
homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Youth%20homelessness&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/youth-homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/youth-
homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Youth%20homelessness&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/youth-homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Homelessness and the right to housing_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/homelessness/)

An overview of homelessness in Ireland, outlining legislation and policy.

1004.60693

  * [ _Housing and other supports for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)

Housing and other supports for homeless people.

921.4318

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

910.33264

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

