**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Reproductive health ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/) > Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)

#  Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)

  * Introduction 
  * What is a sexually transmitted infection (STI)? 
  * Where can I get an STI test in Ireland? 
  * Preventing STIs 
  * Further information on sexual health 
  * Contact details 

##  Introduction

Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are very common. They can affect people
of all ages and backgrounds. If you are worried about an STI, you can get
information and help, and treatment if you need it.

This page has information on sexual health, including sexually transmitted
infections (STIs), how to get an STI test and how to prevent STIs.

##  What is a sexually transmitted infection (STI)?

A sexually transmitted infection (STI) is an infection you can get if you have
sexual activity with an infected person.

The [ HSE website sexualwellbeing.ie ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/sexually-transmitted-infections/types-of-stis/) has information on
sexual health and common STIs in Ireland such as chlamydia, syphilis, HIV and
others.

If you are worried about an STI, you should visit your GP, pharmacist or an [
STI clinic ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-
ireland.html) for medical advice.

STIs do not always have [ symptoms ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/sexually-transmitted-infections/what-if-i-think-i-have-an-sti-/) .
Untreated STIs can cause serious health problems so it is important to get
tested regularly.

##  Where can I get an STI test in Ireland?

You should get an STI test if:

  * You have any [ symptoms of an STI ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/sexually-transmitted-infections/what-if-i-think-i-have-an-sti-/)
  * Your sexual partner has an STI 
  * You have a new sexual partner 
  * You have more than one sexual partner 

###  Ordering a free STI test to your home

If you are aged over 17 and living in Ireland you can [ order a free STI test
online ](https://sh24.ie/) to take at home. If there are no more kits
available to order, try again the following morning. Your STI test kit will
arrive in a plain envelope that fits through letterboxes.

###  How to take a free home STI test

You will find instructions on how to take the STI test kit and a stamped
addressed envelope to post your completed test kit back to the lab. You will
get your results by phone or text message within 72 hours of the samples
arriving at the lab.

###  Getting tested at an STI clinic

Some hospitals and clinics also offer free STI tests. [ Check where your
closest STI test centre is located. ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/hse-sti-services-in-ireland.html)

You can also get STI tests from many GPs, student health services or NGOs (for
example HIV Ireland) but you may have to pay for your test.

You can [ read about what happens during an STI test and what happens if you
test positive for an STI ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/sexually-transmitted-infections/what-if-i-think-i-have-an-sti-/) on the
HSE website.

##  Preventing STIs

Using [ condoms ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/your-choices/condoms/) reduces your risk of getting an
STI. You can get free condoms from:

  * [ Sexual health or GUM (genitourinary medicine) clinics ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-ireland.html)
  * Some sexual health NGOs 
  * Many third level colleges 

You can buy condoms without a prescription from many supermarkets, newsagents
and pharmacies in Ireland.

You can [ read about other ways to reduce your risk of getting an STI.
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/sexually-transmitted-
infections/how-do-i-prevent-stis-/)

###  Vaccines to prevent STIs

Vaccines can prevent some infections that passed during sexual activity
including the [ Human Papillomavirus (HPV)
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/schoolprog/hpv/hpv-human-
papillomavirus/) and Hepatitis A and B.

Some [ public STI clinics offer free vaccinations
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-
ireland.html) . These are generally available to people who may be at risk of
contracting an infection through sexual transmission.

You can [ get more information about vaccination against infections that are
sexually transmitted ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/vaccinations/vaccinations.html) from the HSE.

####  HPV vaccine

The HPV vaccine protects against the HPV virus which can cause cancer in both
men and women.

You can get the free HPV vaccine if you are:

  * Female in second to sixth year of secondary school 
  * Female aged aged under 25 
  * Male in second to fourth year of secondary school 
  * Male in fifth year and you skipped Transition Year 

If you are aged under 16, you do not need to do anything. You will be offered
a free vaccine in your school with the [ school vaccination programme
](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/) or
in a HSE clinic in 2023.

If you were eligible for a free HPV vaccine but you did not get it, you can [
book a HPV vaccine catch-up appointment online.
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/schoolprog/hpv/hpv-
vaccine-catch-up-programme/) This applies if you are:

  * Female aged 16 to 25, or 
  * Male aged 16 or older who started first year of secondary school, homeschool or a special school in September 2019 

You can [ read more about the HPV vaccine on the HSE website.
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/schoolprog/hpv/about/)

####  Monekypox vaccine

Monkeypox spreads from person to person through very close contact. If you are
a close contact of someone who has monkeypox, you will be contacted by health
professionals. They will let you know if you should get a [ monkeypox vaccine.
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/monkeypox/vaccine/#how-the-monkeypox-vaccine-
is-given)

You can [ book a monkeypox vaccine online
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/monkeypox/vaccine/#book-a-monkeypox-
vaccination-appointment-online) if you:

  * have not had monkeypox 
  * have not had a monkeypox vaccine or you have only received your first dose 
  * are in one of these [ at-risk groups listed on the HSE website ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/monkeypox/vaccine/#at-risk-groups)

You can [ read more about Monkeypox on the HSE website
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/monkeypox/) .

##  Further information on sexual health

For more information on STIs such as chlamydia, syphilis, HIV and others,
visit [ sexualwellbeing.ie. ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/sexually-transmitted-infections/types-of-stis/types-of-stis.html) You
can also [ find information on genital conditions
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/sexually-transmitted-
infections/genital-conditions/genital-conditions.html) . The HSE has published
a [ guide to STIs in different languages (pdf)
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/sexually-transmitted-
infections/what-if-i-think-i-have-an-sti-/your-guide-to-stis.pdf) .

Read more about:

  * [ Contraception ](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/contraception/)
  * [ Unplanned pregnancy ](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/unplanned-pregnancy/)

The website [ b4udecide.ie ](http://www.b4udecide.ie/) is a resource for young
people and parents, with information on sex education.There are other
resources for parents, teachers and youth workers on the Sexual Health and
Crisis Pregnancy Programme website, [ sexualwellbeing.ie
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/) .

[ Man2Man.ie ](https://man2man.ie/) is a website of sexual health information
for gay and bisexual men, and other men who have sex with men in Ireland.

##  Contact details

The HSE has published a list of [ HSE run STI clinics and organisations
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-
ireland.html) .

_**Page edited:** 12 December 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/sexual-health/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Sexually%20transmitted%20infections%20%28STIs%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/sexual-health/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/sexual-health/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Sexually%20transmitted%20infections%20%28STIs%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/sexual-health/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

957.28076

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

804.8231

  * [ _Your rights if you bought online on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-online-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something online on or
before 28 November 2022.

757.6103

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

