**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Reproductive health ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/) > Unplanned pregnancy

#  Unplanned pregnancy

  * Introduction 
  * Free information and counselling 
  * Supports to continue pregnancy 
  * Abortion in Ireland 
  * Who to contact 

##  Introduction

If you have an unplanned pregnancy and need support, there are free
confidential services including counselling to help you consider your options
and get the information that you need.

####  Support for partners

Your [ partner or a family member ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-
pregnancy/support-services/support-services-men-partners/) can also get
counselling for an unplanned pregnancy or after an abortion.

##  Free information and counselling

###  Freephone for information and counselling

You can freephone the My Options helpline for information and support on all
your options if you have an unplanned pregnancy. This free helpline gives
information on both continued pregnancy supports and abortion services. It is
provided by the Health Service Executive (HSE).

Free phone 1800 828 010.

If you are calling from outside Ireland, call +353 59 9165066

You can also [ contact My Options by web chat
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-pregnancy/support-services/my-
options-freephone/#)

###  **Face-to-face counselling**

You can also get free in-person counselling from a HSE-funded counselling
service for unplanned pregnancies. Check where your nearest [ counselling
service is on the HSE website ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-
pregnancy/support-services/find-a-face-to-face-service/) .

[ Read more about booking a counselling session for an unplanned pregnancy
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-pregnancy/support-services/booking-a-
counselling-session/) .

##  Supports to continue pregnancy

If you think you are pregnant, you should visit your GP (family doctor) or
contact your local maternity unit or hospital. They can give you information
on the pregnancy care options available to you.

**Antenatal care** is the care you get from healthcare professionals during
your pregnancy. Antenatal care in public maternity hospitals is free. Your GP
appointments under the [ Maternity and Infant Care Scheme ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/) are also
free.

You can [ read more about antenatal and maternity care options on the HSE
website ](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/child-health/antenatal-and-maternity-
care-options/antenatal-and-maternity-care-options.html) .

If you are having a baby, there are various [ benefits and entitlements
relating to birth and children ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-
baby-is-born/benefits-and-entitlements-relating-to-birth/) .

There are [ information resources for parents
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/continued-pregnancy-supports/continued-
pregnancy-supports.html) , including for young parents and one-parent
families.

###  If you want to choose adoption

[ Adoption ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/continued-pregnancy-
supports/adoption.html) is when you continue the pregnancy but give legal
consent for your child to become part of another family on a permanent basis.

You can choose [ adoption ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/continued-pregnancy-
supports/adoption.html) at any stage during your pregnancy.

If you are considering adoption, you do not need to make a final decision
until some months after the birth of your baby. You can discuss this with a [
counsellor for unplanned pregnancy ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-
pregnancy-support-services/find-a-face-to-face-unplanned-pregnancy-
counselling-service.html) .

##  Abortion in Ireland

If you live in Ireland, you can get abortion services for free in the public
health service.

An abortion, also known as a termination, is the medical process of ending a
pregnancy. It may involve taking medication or having a minor surgical
procedure.

You can read information from the HSE on deciding to have an abortion and if
there are any [ risks when getting an abortion
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/how-to-get/risks/) .

###  When can you have an abortion?

You can have an abortion **up to 12 weeks of pregnancy** (that is, no more
than 84 days since the first day of your last period). You will need to begin
the process earlier than this.

After 12 weeks, you can only have an abortion in [ exceptional circumstances
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/methods/after-12-weeks/) , if the
pregnancy:

  * Puts your life at risk 
  * Risks serious harm to your health 
  * Is likely to lead to the death of the foetus before birth or within 28 days of birth because of a problem with its development 

The earlier an abortion is carried out, the simpler and safer it will be.

###  How to get an abortion in Ireland

You need to attend a [ pre-abortion consultation
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/abortion-methods/before-having-an-
abortion.html) and a doctor must certify that you will not be more than 12
weeks pregnant at the time of the abortion. You should have this consultation
as early as you can.

####  3-day wait

After you get this certification, you must wait at least 3 days before you
have an abortion. For example, if you are certified on a Tuesday, the earliest
you can have an abortion is Friday.

The HSE has information on [ where to go for an abortion in Ireland, which
hospitals provide abortion services and how long the procedure takes.
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/how-to-get/where-to-go/)

###  If you are under 18 getting an abortion

**If you are aged under 18,** you are encouraged to involve your parents or
another supportive adult.

**If you are aged over 16,** you can choose not to involve an adult and a
doctor can offer you an abortion if they think you can understand the
information and give consent.

**If you are aged under 16,** and choose not to involve an adult, a doctor can
only offer you an abortion if there are [ exceptional circumstances
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/methods/after-12-weeks/) and you
have had an assessment with a doctor.

If your doctor believes there is a risk to your safety or welfare, [ in
certain circumstances ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/how-to-get-an-
abortion/deciding-to-have-an-abortion.html) , your doctor may have to report
your details to [ Tusla - the Child and Family Agency ](https://www.tusla.ie/)
.

###  After an abortion

You will be offered a [ free post-abortion check-up
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/after/check-up/) about 2 weeks after
having an abortion. You can have this check-up with the GP or doctor you saw
at your pre-abortion consultation. This appointment is optional.

The HSE provide a 24-hour nursing team for someone who has had a recent
abortion and needs medical advice.

The HSE have [ information that is useful to have after an abortion
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/after-an-abortion/physical-side-
effects.html) as well as check-ups, counselling, support and aftercare after
an abortion.

##  Who to contact

###  Phone **My Options**

Freephone: 1800 82 80 10  
Outside of the Republic of Ireland: +353 59 9165066

####  **Information and counselling**

Monday to Thursday: 9am to 8pm

Friday: 9am to 7pm  
Saturday: 10am to 2pm

####  **Medical advice**

24 hours a day, 7 days a week

####  **Irish Sign Language**

[ Book an appointment through the Irish Remote Interpreting Service
](https://slis.ie/iris/#book-an-appointment) to access MyOptions using sign
language.

####  **Irish Text Relay Service**

This service helps people who are deaf, hard-of-hearing or speech-impaired, to
make and receive calls independently. [ Book an appointment through Irish Text
Relay Service ](https://www.itrs.ie/) .

####  **Webchat**

[ Contact My Options by webchat here for information and support.
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-pregnancy/support-services/my-
options-freephone/#)

My Options does not record calls.

####  **If you or someone you know does not speak English**

If you do not speak English, MyOptions can provide you with an interpreter.
Freephone: 1800 82 80 10

_**Page edited:** 9 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-
pregnancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Unplanned%20pregnancy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-
pregnancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-
pregnancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Unplanned%20pregnancy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-
pregnancy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

1299.3477

  * [ _Youth Information Centres and Services_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/)

Youth Information Centres and Services provide free, confidential information
for young people and for people who work with young people.

1232.398

  * [ _Bereavement counselling and support services_ ](/en/death/bereavement-counselling-and-support/bereavement-counselling-andsupport-services/)

There are a range of bereavement counselling and support services available in
Ireland. This document contains useful contacts and information to help you
through this difficult time.

1220.7952

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

