**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Food safety
](/en/health/food-safety/) > Food safety and eating out

#  Food safety and eating out

  * Introduction 
  * What to expect when eating out 
  * How is food safety enforced? 
  * How to make a complaint 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

When you eat out in Ireland, you enter into a consumer contract with the
restaurant, café, pub or other food service provider. [ As a consumer you have
certain rights ](/en/consumer/consumer-laws/your-consumer-rights/) . This
document gives you information about your consumer rights when eating out.

##  What to expect when eating out

###  Pricing

Before you eat in a restaurant, café or other food service premises, you are
entitled to see the prices. Prices may be displayed on an individual menu or
on a display such as a blackboard.

In addition to the food and drink prices, the price list should also include
information on:

  * A minimum charge (if applicable) 
  * A service charge (if applicable) 
  * A cover charge or any similar charge 

###  Food safety and hygiene

When you eat out, you can expect high standards of food safety and hygiene.

The Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI) ensures that food that is
consumed, distributed, marketed or produced in Ireland meets high standards of
food safety and hygiene.

Food sold in restaurants, cafés and other food premises must meet legal
requirements and follow [ codes of good practice for food hygiene
](https://www.fsai.ie/enforcement-and-legislation/legislation/food-
legislation/food-hygiene) .

##  How is food safety enforced?

The FSAI enforces [ food safety laws in Ireland
](https://www.fsai.ie/legislation/FSAI_act_related.html) through service
contracts with official agencies, including the Health Service Executive
(HSE).

An authorised officer, such as an [ Environmental Health Officer
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/Contact.html) , will search
and inspect the food premises. They may take samples of food and other
material as part of their investigation.

###  Enforcement powers

If the authorised officer finds that a premises or a practice (such as food
handling or preparation) is likely to be a risk to public health, they may
give the owner an **improvement notice** . This includes:

  * The cause of the risk to public health 
  * The remedial action that needs to be taken 
  * The time limit for the owner to take remedial action 

If the owner does not carry out the improvements as recommended by the
authorised officer, the FSAI or HSE may seek an **improvement order** from the
[ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) . An improvement
order outlines what needs to be improved upon, and the timeframe within which
the owner needs to do it.

If there is an immediate danger to public health, the authorised officer may
issue a **closure order** . This means the owner must close the business until
the issue has been resolved. A closure order may also be issued if an
improvement order is not acted on. [ Closure and prohibition orders
](https://www.fsai.ie/consumer-advice/closure-orders) are listed on the FSAI
website.

##  How to make a complaint

As a consumer, you have a right to safe food when you are eating out. Do not
accept food if you find it is unfit to eat.

Food may be unfit to eat if it:

  * Is not piping hot 
  * Smells ‘off’ 
  * Appears to be contaminated with chemicals or detergents 
  * Is off-colour – for example, if chicken is pink in the centre 
  * Contains a foreign object such as hair or insects 

Food may also be unfit to eat if it has been prepared in a place with poor
hygiene standards. When eating out, you should check whether:

  * The restaurant or café is visibly dirty 
  * Staff use dirty cloths to clean multiple surfaces 
  * Staff have dirty hands 
  * Staff handle food and money without wearing gloves or washing their hands in-between 

If you are unhappy about the quality of food you have purchased, or if you are
concerned about the cleanliness of a food premises, you can make a complaint.

###  Making a complaint

You should first complain to the person who is serving you. Next, you should
speak to the manager on duty.

You may want to fill in the FSAI’s [ online complaint form
](https://www.fsai.ie/makeitbetter/) . The information you give on this form
is confidential and will not be shared with the food premises. Instead, it
will usually be given to the local Environmental Health Office (EHO) who will
then carry out an investigation.

###  Food poisoning

If you think you have [ symptoms of food poisoning
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/f/food-poisoning/symptoms-of-food-
poisoning.html) , you should contact your GP.

Make a note of:

  * Where you bought the suspected food 
  * When you started to feel unwell 
  * Your symptoms 

If your GP confirms that you have food poisoning, you should:

  * Phone the FSAI on 0818 33 66 77, or 
  * Email the FSAI at info@fsai.ie, or 
  * Contact your [ local Environmental Health Officer ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/environmental-health-officers.html)   

##  Further information

You can call the FSAI on **0818 33 66 77** or **(01) 8171 300** for
information and advice on a range of food safety issues.

You can also email the FSAI at info@fsai.ie or reception@fsai.ie, or follow
the FSAI on [ Facebook ](https://www.facebook.com/FSAI) and [ Twitter
](https://twitter.com/FSAIinfo) .

###  Food Safety Authority of Ireland

The Exchange  
George's Dock  
IFSC  
Dublin 1  
D01 P2V6  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 8171300

**Fax:** +353 1 8171301

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fsai.ie ](http://www.fsai.ie)

**Email:** [ info@fsai.ie ](mailto:info@fsai.ie)

_**Page edited:** 3 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-eating-out/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Food%20safety%20and%20eating%20out&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-eating-out/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-eating-out/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Food%20safety%20and%20eating%20out&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-eating-out/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Food safety and food poisoning_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-food-poisoning/)

What to do if you have contracted food poisoning as a result of consuming
contaminated food.

1748.5076

  * [ _Food safety and shopping_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-shopping/)

Consumer advice on shopping for and storing food safely.

1648.3435

  * [ _Food safety and environmental health services_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-services/)

A brief description of the different agencies involved in food safety and
environmental health in Ireland and Europe.

1574.0879

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

