**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Legal matters
and health ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/) > Agency agreements,
trusts, and ordinary powers of attorney

#  Agency agreements, trusts, and ordinary powers of attorney

  * Introduction 
  * Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 
  * Agency arrangements 
  * Agency arrangements for social welfare payments 
  * Power of attorney 
  * Trusts 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

There may be many reasons why you are unable to deal with your affairs. For
example, you may be physically unable to collect your pension or you may
acquire an illness or disability that limits your ability to make decisions.
If you become incapable of dealing with your affairs, there are various legal
arrangements you can make to have someone else do these things on your behalf.

The choice of legal arrangements open to you depends on your precise
circumstances. Some of the arrangements are very simple to make and have
limited effect, for example, appointing an agent to collect your social
welfare payment. Others are much more complex and require the help of legal
and medical professionals, for example, executing an enduring power of
attorney. It is advisable to  take legal advice  before entering into the more
complex arrangements.

##  Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015

The [ Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015 ](/en/health/legal-matters-
and-health/assisted-decision-making-act/) creates new decision-making
arrangements to help people make decisions about their welfare and their
property and affairs. This assistance and support is required where the person
lacks, or may lack, the capacity to make the decision unaided.

The new arrangements include [ decision making assistance ](/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/decision-making-assistance-agreement/) and [ co-decision-
making ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/co-decision-making-agreement/)
and a process is also set out for a court to appoint a [ decision-making
representative ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-
assistance-agreement/) for an individual.

As well as introducing new decision-making procedures, the Act sets out new
arrangements for [ wards of court ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/wards-
of-court/) and for people who wish to make an [ enduring power of attorney
](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/) .

The [ Decision Support Service ](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/) has been
set up to provide a range of functions when the new arrangements come into
effect.

##  Agency arrangements

If you appoint another person to represent you in certain dealings with third
parties, you are making an agency arrangement. You are called the principal
and the person you appoint is called the agent or appointed representative.
The most usual example is where a pensioner nominates someone to collect
social welfare pension payments or other allowances from the post office.

Another example of an agency arrangement is where you appoint a friend or
family member as an agent to manage your financial affairs or pay bills while
you are abroad for a period. You may appoint a professional to do these things
and pay for the service – this is not an agency arrangement but is a contract
for services.

If you are physically incapacitated, your bank may allow you to carry out a
third-party mandate. This authorises your agent to perform certain functions,
for example, to write cheques on your behalf.

You may only make an agency arrangement while you are mentally competent and
the arrangement usually only lasts while you remain mentally competent. The
arrangement does not have to be in writing unless the agent is required to
sell property on your behalf. It is advisable to put the arrangement in
writing so that both you and the agent are clear about what is intended and
what powers the agent has.

##  Agency arrangements for social welfare payments

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) has the power under social welfare
legislation to make payments to a third party acting on behalf of a social
welfare recipient. The legal status of a social welfare agency relationship is
different from the general agency relationship in that the social welfare
agency may be put in place or may continue in operation if you become mentally
incapable.

If an agent is appointed to collect the money, it is still your money and
there is a legal duty on the agent to use it on your behalf and for your
benefit. The DSP may end the agency arrangement at any time where it has
reason to believe that the arrangement is not working satisfactorily.

There are 3 different types of social welfare agency arrangements.

###  **Temporary agent arrangement**

If you are unable to collect your payment at a post office for a short period
of time a temporary agent can be appointed by completing an [ Appointment of
Temporary Agent Form (pdf)
](https://www.anpost.com/AnPost/media/PDFs/Appointment-of-Temporary-Agent.pdf)
which is available at the post office. When collecting your payment the agent
presents and signs this form along with their photo identification and your
social services card or Public Services Card.

###  **Nominating an agent to collect your payment**

If you are unable to collect your payment at a post office, due to an illness
or loss of mobility for example, you can nominate a person to do this on your
behalf by completing and returning the form [ Authority to Appoint an Agent
form (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/44370/a606cd22a6ca4d9d927222e349dc4a11.pdf)
. Arrangements are made with the post office to facilitate the agent
collecting the payment and you are notified of this.

###  **If you are not able to manage your financial affairs**

If you are not able to manage your financial affairs, an agent may be
appointed to collect your payment and act on your behalf. In this case a
medical practitioner must certify that you do not have the capacity to manage
your financial affairs. There is a section for this certification on the [
Authority to Appoint an Agent form (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/44370/a606cd22a6ca4d9d927222e349dc4a11.pdf) .

The agent nominated is often a family member, a care representative or a
representative of a nursing home or hospital.

The payment is made electronically to a nominated bank account. It is
recommended that a separate account be set up for this purpose.

In the case of a Ward of Court or an attorney appointed under an enduring
power of attorney (see below), the DSP will make payments directly to the
Committee of the Ward or to the attorney by nominating them as agent for the
social welfare recipient. All such payments will be made electronically to a
nominated bank account.

Appointed agents have a legal duty to ensure the money is used for your
benefit and they must also deal with other aspects of your social welfare
payment. This includes notifying the DSP of changes to your circumstances.

Read the [ DSP information on appointing someone else to act on your behalf
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/451fd7-authority-to-appoint-an-agent/) .

##  Power of attorney

A power of attorney is a document in which you (the donor) authorise another
person (the donee or attorney) to act for you in certain matters – on your
behalf and in your name – in accordance with the terms set out in the
document. A power of attorney can be specific (limited to a particular
purpose, for example, sale of your house in your absence) or general
(entitling the attorney to do almost everything that you yourself could do).

A power of attorney must always be in writing.

There are two kinds of power of attorney:

  * Power of attorney which gives either a specific or a general power and ceases as soon as the donor becomes incapacitated 
  * [ Enduring power of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/) which takes effect on the incapacity of the donor 

##  Trusts

Property, including money assets, may be held in trust on behalf of another
person or to achieve a particular purpose. A trust exists when a person (the
trustee) holds the property of another (the settlor) for the benefit of named
people. The beneficiaries may be the settlor or may be other people.

By creating a trust you can ensure that, should you subsequently become
mentally incompetent, your affairs will be managed in a particular manner. The
trust continues to be administered by the trustee for your benefit without the
necessity to have you made a ward of court.

A trust is also a useful tool if you have a child with a disability and you
want to ensure that they will be cared for if you become incapable or after
your death.

Trusts are legally complex and have tax implications so you should take legal
and tax advice. There are different kinds of trusts of which the most usual
are express trusts and discretionary trusts. Discretionary trusts are
especially useful if you want to provide for an incapacitated child without
affecting their entitlement to State benefits. [ Certain trust funds for
permanently incapacitated people may have tax exemptions ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/trust-funds-for-
permanently-incapacitated-people/) .

##  Further information

You can get further information from the Decision Support Service.

###  Decision Support Service

Waterloo Exchange,  
Waterloo Road, Dublin 4  
Eircode: D04 E5W7  
Republic of Ireland

**Tel:** 01 2119750

**Homepage:** [ https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie
](https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie)

**Email:** [ queries@decisionsupportservice.ie
](mailto:queries@decisionsupportservice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-
incapacity/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Agency%20agreements%2C%20trusts%2C%20and%20ordinary%20powers%20of%20attorney&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-
incapacity/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-
incapacity/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Agency%20agreements%2C%20trusts%2C%20and%20ordinary%20powers%20of%20attorney&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-
incapacity/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

872.8065

  * [ _Legal recognition of your preferred gender_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/legal-recognition-of-preferred-gender/)

The Gender Recognition Act 2015 provides for the legal recognition of a
person's preferred gender by the State.

814.8544

  * [ _Types of decision support arrangements_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-support-arrangements/)

Decision support arrangements are available to give the legal authority to
someone to help you make decisions or make decisions on your behalf.

807.3409

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

