**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Local
authority and social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/) > Anti-social behaviour and rent arrears in social housing

#  Anti-social behaviour and rent arrears in social housing

  * Introduction 
  * What is anti-social behaviour in social housing? 
  * What if someone in my household is engaging in anti-social behaviour? 
  * What are the consequences of anti-social behaviour in social housing? 
  * Who do I contact about anti-social behaviour in social housing? 
  * What are rent arrears in social housing? 
  * What should I do if I can’t pay the rent? 
  * What happens if I don’t pay my rent arrears? 
  * Who do I contact if I am in rent arrears? 

##  Introduction

If you are renting your home from a local authority, you have certain
responsibilities. For example, you must pay the rent on time and not engage in
anti-social behaviour.

If you don’t keep these responsibilities, you may end up [ losing your home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/repossession-of-rented-social-housing/) . If you are affected by anti-
social behaviour, you should call the Gardaí to report it, and contact your
local authority.

If you are having trouble paying rent, you should contact your local authority
immediately so you can try and find a solution.

##  What is anti-social behaviour in social housing?

Anti-social behaviour in social housing means being involved in drug-dealing
or in any behaviour that might cause danger, injury, damage or fear to people
living in the area.

This could be through:

  * Violence 
  * Threats 
  * Intimidation 
  * Harassment 

Local authorities [ can evict ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/repossession-of-rented-social-housing/) anyone who is engaging in
anti-social behaviour.

##  What if someone in my household is engaging in anti-social behaviour?

You can apply for an excluding order against a member of your household who is
engaging in anti-social behaviour. An excluding order is a legal order that
can prevent someone from going somewhere or from having contact with someone.
The order may:

  * Exclude the person from a specific home or from an entire estate 
  * Forbid the person from intimidating, harassing or interfering with you or anyone else 

It may be difficult for you to do this if you are the victim of the anti-
social behaviour. So, the local authority or [ approved housing body
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) can
apply to the [ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) for
an excluding order against any member of your household who is engaging in
anti-social behaviour.

##  What are the consequences of anti-social behaviour in social housing?

Local authorities can [ evict you for anti-social behaviour
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/repossession-of-rented-
social-housing/) .

Your local authority should send you a tenancy warning notice about the anti-
social behaviour, before it begins the process to repossess your home.
However, they may not need to issue a tenancy warning if there is very serious
anti-social behaviour. You can ask for a review of the tenancy warning.

If you don’t deal with the anti-social behaviour, the local authority can
begin the proceedings to take possession of your home.

If you are evicted, excluded or removed from local authority housing because
of anti-social behaviour:

  * You may not be accepted on any [ local authority housing list ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-lists/) again 
  * You may not be allowed to [ buy your local authority home under a Tenant Purchase Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/buying-or-inheriting-a-local-authority-home/#d25023)
  * The Department of Social Protection may refuse or withdraw [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) for a private rented property 

If you’ve received a tenancy warning, exclusion order or repossession order,
you should get legal advice.

##  Who do I contact about anti-social behaviour in social housing?

If you are a local authority tenant who is affected by anti-social behaviour,
contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

If you are the tenant of an approved housing body, you should contact the [
approved housing body ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) .

You can also contact the Garda Síochána to report the behaviour.

There is useful information on our website about [ neighbour disputes
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/neighbour_disputes/) .

##  What are rent arrears in social housing?

If you are renting your home from a local authority, you agree to pay a weekly
rent. Your rent is based on your household's income and your ability to pay.
If you can’t pay the rent, for whatever reason, you will build up rent
arrears.

##  What should I do if I can’t pay the rent?

If you can’t pay the rent for your local authority housing, you should talk to
your local authority immediately to discuss the arrears. They will work with
you to try find a solution. They can:

  * Reduce your rent if your income decreases, or your circumstances change. For example, if you lose your job, or an adult in the household moves out. 
  * Agree a repayment plan with you. This means you will pay off a certain amount of the rent arrears each week in addition to your normal weekly rent. 
  * Provide support for you to stay in your home through a tenancy sustainment programme. This programme is aimed at people in rent arrears. 
  * Reduce your rent if there is a particular reason to do so. For example, the local authority can reduce your rent if your household is badly affected by exceptional social factors that make it difficult for the house to function or to pay the rent, or if it would cause undue hardship for your household to pay the full rent. This reduction in rent is provided under a hardship clause. 

If you don’t arrange to pay off the arrears, you could end up [ losing your
home ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-
social-housing/repossession-of-rented-social-housing/) .

##  What happens if I don’t pay my rent arrears?

Local authorities are used to dealing with rent arrears issues, so if you fall
behind with your payments you should contact them immediately to try and come
to a solution. If you don’t contact your local authority about your arrears,
they may start the process to evict you.

The local authority cannot evict you unless the District Court feels it is
reasonable to do so in the circumstances. The local authority must send you a
tenancy warning notice about the rent arrears before it begins the process.
You can ask for a review of the tenancy warning. If you don’t pay the rent
arrears or arrange a repayment plan, the local authority can begin the process
of taking your home.

If you are in rent arrears, you may be unable to:

  * [ Transfer to another local authority home ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/getting-a-transfer-to-another-local-authority-home/)
  * Get your local authority to do maintenance on your home, apart from emergency maintenance 

If you are evicted for rent arrears, you may not be accepted on any [ local
authority housing list ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-lists/) again.

##  Who do I contact if I am in rent arrears?

You should contact the Housing Section of your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) if you have any
issues paying your rent.

You can also contact the [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS)
](https://mabs.ie/) for advice about rent arrears. MABS is a free,
confidential service for people who are having problems with debt and money
management.

###  MABS

Commercial House  
Westend Commercial Village  
Blanchardstown  
Dublin 15  
Ireland

**Tel:** 0818 07 2000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.mabs.ie ](https://www.mabs.ie)

_**Page edited:** 4 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-rent-arrears-in-social-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Anti-
social%20behaviour%20and%20rent%20arrears%20in%20social%20housing&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-rent-arrears-in-social-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-rent-arrears-in-social-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Anti-
social%20behaviour%20and%20rent%20arrears%20in%20social%20housing&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-rent-arrears-in-social-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Anti-social behaviour by children_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-children/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 introduced provisions for dealing with anti-
social behaviour by children. These provisions allow the Gardaí to deal with
anti-social behaviour in a number of ways.

2470.958

  * [ _Anti-social behaviour by adults_ ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/anti-social-behaviour-by-adults/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 has provisions dealing with anti-social
behaviour by adults. These provisions allow gardaí to deal with anti-social
behaviour through a civil process using behaviour warnings and orders or
ASBOs.

2470.958

  * [ _Repossession of rented social housing_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/repossession-of-rented-social-housing/)

The procedures that local authorities must follow before repossessing a rented
dwelling.

1950.8114

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

