**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Local
authority and social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/) > Social housing waiting lists

#  Social housing waiting lists

  * What are social housing waiting lists? 
  * How does the social housing waiting list work? 
  * How are social homes allocated? 
  * Summary of social housing assessments 
  * Where to apply 

##  What are social housing waiting lists?

Local authorities keep a record of people who are qualified for social housing
support and who have not received it. As social housing becomes available, the
local authority allocates it to people who are on its _record of qualified
households. The record of qualified households is_ more commonly known as the
social housing waiting list.

Before offering you accommodation, the local authority reviews its assessment
of your application for social housing support and confirms that your
household still qualifies. Local authorities must also review all applications
on their housing lists every year and prepare a [ summary report
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/social-housing-waiting-lists/#556f10) detailing the number of people
on the list in the area.

As well as the main housing lists, local authorities also maintain lists of
people who have [ applied for a transfer ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-
social-housing/getting-a-transfer-to-another-local-authority-home/) from their
current accommodation. There is also a transfer list for people on the [
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-
renting/housing-assistance-payment/) who want to be considered for social
housing.

##  How does the social housing waiting list work?

###  Getting on the social housing list

When you [ apply for social housing
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/) , the local authority assesses
your application to see if your household qualifies for social housing. If you
qualify, you’re placed on the social housing waiting list. If you have listed
an ‘area of choice’ in your application that is in another local authority
area, your local authority will notify the other local authority of this.

###  While you are on the housing list

Each local authority draws up its own rules for deciding the order of priority
on their social housing waiting list. These are called housing allocation
schemes and are published on the local authority’s website.

Most local authorities prioritise people who have been on the waiting list the
longest. They may also operate a points system, giving each household on the
list a number of points depending on their circumstances.

Your position may go up or down on the list depending on the circumstances of
other people on the list and if your own circumstances change. In practice,
priority is generally given to families and older people rather than single
people or couples without children.

Local authorities also have specific waiting lists for:

  * Older person accommodation (generally for people over 55 years) 
  * People who are homeless 
  * Traveller-specific accommodation 

**If your circumstances change while on the waiting list**

If your circumstances change while you are on the list, you should tell the
local authority so they can update your household’s record. For example, if
you have a new baby or someone leaves your household. You should also tell
your local authority if your address changes.

**How to find out where you are on the waiting list**

If you want to know your position on the housing list, you can ask your local
authority. You can also ask your local authority to give you an estimate of
the waiting time for a home.

###  Renting privately while waiting for social housing

If you are in private rented accommodation while waiting for local authority
housing, you may qualify for the [ Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-
renting/housing-assistance-payment/) . If you are housed under HAP, your
housing need will have been met and you will no longer be on the local
authority’s housing list. However, if you still want to be considered for
social housing you can apply to be placed on the local authority's transfer
list.

If you apply for a transfer **within 2 weeks of getting the letter confirming
your HAP payment** , any time that you spent on the housing list can be taken
into account when your local authority considers your application. If you
apply for a transfer at a later date, the time that you previously spent on
the housing list will not count.

##  How are social homes allocated?

In general, as houses and apartments become available, they are allocated from
the housing list in order of priority. However, local authorities can also
allocate a portion of their social housing using a system of _choice-based
letting_ , see below.

When the local authority is planning to offer you accommodation, it must
review its assessment of your household’s eligibility and need for social
housing. It must also confirm that your application is still valid, for
example, it will check that you still have a connection with the area.

If you have chosen to be considered for accommodation provided by a [ housing
association or other approved housing body
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) (by ticking the 'approved housing body
(AHB)' box on the social housing application form) one of these organisations
may contact you if suitable accommodation becomes available.

**Can I refuse an offer of a home?**

If you are offered a house or apartment that you do not want, you can refuse
it without affecting your place on the housing list. However, if the local
authority thinks that you do not have a good reason for refusing the offer, it
may reduce your priority on the list.

If you refuse more than one reasonable offer in any 12-month period, you will
be suspended from the list for 12 months, during which you cannot claim Rent
Supplement.

**What is choice based letting?**

Local authorities can allocate some of their social housing using a different
system called Choice Based Letting (CBL). This is an online system which lets
local authorities advertise some of their social housing so approved social
housing applicants can express their interest in the available properties.

Not all local authorities us the CBL system. If they do, they will advertise
CBL properties online when they are available. The properties can be viewed on
the local authority’s website. They may also be advertised in the media.

The advertisements include information about:

  * The location of the home 
  * The type of home, for example, a two-bedroom apartment 
  * The type of household that can apply for the home, for example, a single-person household 
  * The floor plan or photographs of the home 
  * The house rules 
  * The closing date for expressing your interest in the property (this is usually a few weeks) 

Local authorities can restrict CBL applications to qualified people who
selected the location of the advertised property as an area of choice on their
social housing application. The property advertisement will state if this
restriction applies.

If you want to express your interest in a CBL property, the advertisement will
provide information about how to apply. You can also contact your [ local
authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for
information.

If a number of qualified people express an interest in a CBL home, the home
will be allocated in line with the local authorities’ allocation scheme.

If you are offered a house or apartment under the CBL system and you refuse
it, you will not be able to apply for a CBL property for 12 months. This will
not affect your position on the housing list.

For more information about choice-based letting contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

**Can my local authority refuse to allocate me a house?**

If you or a member of your household has previously been in local authority
housing, the housing authority will not allocate housing to you if you or a
household member have:

  * Damaged a property previously provided by a housing authority, without repairing the property or paying for repairs 
  * Breached the terms of a local authority tenancy agreement, leading to the authority ending the tenancy 
  * Built up rent arrears for 12 weeks or more in any period of 3 years as a local authority tenant, without either paying them off or arranging to pay them 

However, in exceptional circumstances local authorities can consider providing
social housing support to households in the first two situations outlined
above. This is outlined in the [ Social Housing Assessment (Amendment) (No. 2)
Regulations 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2011/si/321/made/en/print) .

##  Summary of social housing assessments

Every year, each local authority must prepare a summary of the social housing
assessments carried out in its area. They contact all households on their
housing lists to confirm that they still qualify for social housing support.
They also request up-to-date information about income, family size and current
housing conditions.

It is important for all households to respond to the local authority with the
details requested. If your address has changed since you went on the housing
list, you should contact the local authority and give your current address.

Gov.ie provide the most recent [ Summary of Social Housing Assessments
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/62486-summary-of-social-housing-
assessments/) .

##  Where to apply

For more information about the social housing waiting list, or if you have any
queries about the summary of social housing assessments, contact your [ local
authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

_**Page edited:** 19 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-
lists/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20housing%20waiting%20lists&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-
lists/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-
lists/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20housing%20waiting%20lists&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/social-housing-waiting-
lists/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Examples of how social welfare payments are taxed_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-taxed/)

See examples of how social welfare payments are taxed, such as Maternity
Benefit, Jobseeker’s Benefit, and Illness Benefit.

1878.1748

  * [ _Repossession of rented social housing_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/repossession-of-rented-social-housing/)

The procedures that local authorities must follow before repossessing a rented
dwelling.

1708.044

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

1686.2432

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

