**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Legal matters
and health ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/) > Consent to medical and
surgical procedures

#  Consent to medical and surgical procedures

  * Introduction 
  * Giving consent 
  * Refusal of medical treatment 
  * Children 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

As a general rule, medical or surgical procedures may not be carried out
without the informed consent of the patient.

Informed consent can be given where the patient has enough information to be
able to understand what is proposed and the potential risks and benefits. The
patient must have the capacity to make the decision and must be free to do so
without threat or pressure from others.

There are specific laws about consent in relation to the [ rights of
psychiatric patients ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/rights-of-
psychiatric-patients/) .

##  Giving consent

If you are an adult with capacity, there is no doubt about the need for [
consent ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/assisted-decision-making-
act#l26a1c) but what exactly constitutes informed consent is not totally
clear.

You may give a general consent – for example, you may tell your doctor to do
what they consider best. You may give implied consent by not specifically
ruling out certain procedures.

Your implied consent may arise out of necessity – for example, if unexpected
complications arise during an operation.

If you are seriously ill and not in a position to give or withhold consent,
the doctor may carry out what would be considered usual procedures arising
from necessity.

Sometimes doctors may consult with your family or nearest relatives but they
really have no legal right to give or withhold consent.

###  If there is no consent

If a person carries out medical or surgical procedures without consent, they
could be charged with the crime of assault - the decision on charges is made
by the Director of Public Prosecutions.

They could also be sued for the torts (civil wrongs) of assault and/or battery
and possibly for breach of constitutional rights. If the person involved is a
medical professional, they could also be sued for negligence. The patient may
take these actions.

##  Refusal of medical treatment

It is clear that, if you are an adult with capacity, you have the right to
refuse or discontinue medical treatment even if the inevitable consequence is
that you will die. This is different from taking positive measures to end your
own life or another person's life.

If you are not mentally competentdo not have capacity, you are not in a
position to make a decision about refusing or discontinuing medical treatment.
The law is not clear on exactly who is competent to do this. In general, a
medical professional may make decisions that the treatment should be
discontinued for medical reasons.

An [ Advance Healthcare Directive ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-
health/advance-care-directives/) is a document in which a person sets out
their wishes about the continuation or otherwise of medical treatment if they
should become mentally incapable.

An Advance Healthcare Directive may be valid and enforceable because, by
making it, you may have withdrawn your consent to specific medical or surgical
treatment. It is not possible to state with absolute certainty that such a
directive would be enforced because this depends on exactly what it says and
whether or not it addresses the precise circumstances you face.

###  Decision support agreements

The [ Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/64/enacted/en/html) provides
laws to support decision-making by adults who have difficulty in making
decisions without help. The Act also provides a statutory framework for
Advance Healthcare Directives.

If you have a [ decision support arrangement ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-
health/decision-support-arrangements/) , your decision supporter can help you
make decisions on certain matters.

An [ enduring power of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/)
also does not give the attorney the power to make decisions of this nature on
behalf of the person granting the power.

##  Children

In general, children aged 16 or over may themselves give consent to surgical,
medical or dental procedures, without requiring the consent of their parents
or guardians. This is provided for in the Non-Fatal Offences Against the
Person Act 1997.

It is the practice to get parental consent to medical procedures for children
under that age, even though it is not entirely clear that parents have the
ultimate decision. However, a child’s views should also be sought and, in the
limited cases where a medical professional believes the child is sufficiently
capable of making the decision, their consent should be sought.

Generally, a medical professional cannot override the requirement for parental
consent for a young child. However, the best interests of the child is the
fundamental guiding principle and the requirement for parental consent may be
overridden where the child’s life is at risk.

Like other medical procedures, a child aged 16 or over may consent to having
an abortion. However, the doctor providing the service must be confident that
the child fully understands the information in order to give a valid consent.
A child aged 16 or over, but under the age of 18, will normally be encouraged
to involve their parents or another supportive adult. However, if the child is
over 16 they can choose not to involve an adult.

In exceptional circumstances, a child aged 15 or under can choose to have an
abortion and not involve her parents or another supportive adult if the doctor
believes the child is capable of consenting, following an appropriate
assessment.

##  Further information

The National Consent Policy applies to services provided by or on behalf of
the Health Service Executive (HSE). The [ National Consent Policy and guides
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/national-office-human-rights-equality-
policy/consent/hse-national-consent-policy.pdf) are available for download.
These include guides for patients, professionals and young people.  

_**Page edited:** 2 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/consent-to-medical-and-surgical-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Consent%20to%20medical%20and%20surgical%20procedures&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/consent-to-medical-and-surgical-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/consent-to-medical-and-surgical-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Consent%20to%20medical%20and%20surgical%20procedures&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/consent-to-medical-and-surgical-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Medical services and entitlements for asylum seekers_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/medical-services-and-entitlements-for-asylum-seekers/)

Medical services for asylum seekers.

1208.506

  * [ _Health and medical services for children_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/child-health-services/)

The general entitlement of children to health services in Ireland and the
specific services available.

1033.3074

  * [ _Access to medical records_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/access-to-medical-records/)

There are many ways you can access personal medical records. Find out how.

1008.5766

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

