**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Legal matters
and health ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/) > Access to medical records

#  Access to medical records

  * Introduction 
  * Upcoming changes to health information 
  * Routine and administrative access to HSE records 
  * Data protection to access your medical information 
  * Freedom of Information to access your medical information 
  * Open disclosure and your right to patient safety information 
  * How to access somebody else’s medical records 
  * Accessing medical information in court 
  * Further Information 

##  Introduction

You can get access to your medical records and information in a number of
different ways.

###  Confidentiality and disclosure

Your doctors and healthcare staff must keep your medical records private for
you (in confidence).

The privacy of your personal information such as your medical records is
protected by [ data protection laws
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/data_protection/)
and the Freedom of Information Act. Under these laws, other people and
organisations cannot get access to your personal information except under
exceptional circumstances.

###  Accessing medical records in the public healthcare system

You can access your medical records in the public healthcare system:

  * By writing to Health Service Executive (HSE) 
  * Under [ data protection ](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/data_protection/) laws 
  * Under the [ Freedom of Information ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/freedom-of-information/) Act 
  * On the basis of a contract between the patient and the medical practitioner or hospital 
  * By _discovery_ , in the course of court proceedings 

The HSE provides a [ list of public hospitals
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/acutehospitals/hospitals/) .

You are a patient of the public health system if you use a [ medical card
](https://citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) or [ GP visit card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-
visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) for GP services, or a public or publicly funded
hospital.

###  Accessing medical records in the private healthcare system

If you visit your GP as a **private** patient, attend a private hospital, or
are cared for in a private nursing home, you can get access to your medical
records:

  * Under [ data protection ](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/data_protection/) laws 
  * On the basis of your contract with the medical service, or 
  * By court order 

##  Upcoming changes to health information

####  **Health Information Bill 2024**

The new [ Health Information Bill 2024 (pdf.)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/299641/edc11db0-effc-4bd9-bdc9-98e8a233e657.pdf#page=null)
was published. If passed by the Oireachtas it will:

  * Establish a clear legal basis for the establishment of a Digital Health Record for all patients in Ireland 
  * Allow patients greater access to their own health information 
  * Facilitate appropriate sharing of care records in support of integrated care 

You can read more about the [ Health Information Bill 2024
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/21d04-minister-for-health-publishes-
bill-to-provide-a-legal-basis-for-digital-health-records-in-ireland/) .

####  Patient Safety Act 2023

The [ Patient Safety (Notifiable Incidents and Open Disclosure) Act 2023
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2019/100/) was commenced. See below
for information on open disclosure and patient safety.

##  Routine and administrative access to HSE records

You can access your HSE health records by writing to the service where you
received your healthcare. The HSE gives information on getting your health
records using routine and administrative access.

##  Data protection to access your medical information

You are entitled to find out if there is information about you held on record,
to access those records and to have them corrected if they are inaccurate.
This applies to public and private healthcare providers. Data held must be
accurate and up to date. The rules on data protection are set by the [ General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/overview-of-general-data-protection-regulation/) .

There may be situations where giving you the information on your records is
likely to cause serious harm to your physical or mental health. In this case,
you will not be given information

When you or somebody you know dies, GDPR laws do not apply to the personal
data. You can read about how to access a deceased person’s records below.

Find information on the [ Data Protection Commission website
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/) about [ accessing your personal information
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals) .

The Commission also deals with [ complaints in relation to data protection
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/exercising-your-rights/raising-
concern-commission) .

###  **How do I access my information using GDPR?**

If you want to access your information, write to the relevant health service
to [ make a data access request
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/know-your-rights/right-access-
information) . You may be asked to provide evidence of your identity.

If you are [ making an access request to a HSE service (pdf)
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/gdpr/data-requests/sars-information.pdf) send them a
[ HSE Subject Access Request Form (pdf)
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/gdpr/sarsform.pdf) .

You can find more [ information about GDPR on the HSE website
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/gdpr) .

##  Freedom of Information to access your medical information

Your medical records are your personal records.

You have an individual right of access to your personal records held by the [
Freedom of Information Act 2014
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2014/en/act/pub/0030/index.html) (FOI Act).

Public bodies the FOI Act applies to include:

  * The Health Service Executive (HSE) 
  * Voluntary hospitals 
  * Some health agencies 
  * GP records 

You can check this list of [ public bodies covered by FOI
](https://foi.gov.ie/faqs/what-bodies-are-covered-by-foi/) .

**If you are a** [ **medical card holder** ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-
visit-cards/medical-card/) **, you can use FOI to get medical records from
records held by your GP.**

You cannot use FOI for medical records from a private hospital or from your GP
if you visit them as a private patient. Some public bodies are exempt from
Freedom of Information.

###  **How to access my medical records using Freedom of Information**

If you want to [ access records under the FOI Act ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/freedom-of-
information/) , you should apply to the public body that holds them.

If you have a medical card, the HSE holds the records of medical card holders.

If the head of the public body believes that giving you the information may be
harmful to your health or emotional well-being, they can instead give the
medical records to a health professional that you choose.

If you have a dispute about access to records under the FOI Act, you should
contact the [ Office of the Information Commissioner ](http://www.oic.ie/) .

##  Open disclosure and your right to patient safety information

If certain serious patient safety incidents happen during your care, you and
your family must be told by the healthcare body. This is known as the
mandatory open disclosure policy and was introduced by the [ Patient Safety
(Notifiable Incidents and Open Disclosure) Act 2023
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2019/100/) on 26 September 2024.

The act contains a list of the specific patient safety incidents you must be
told about such as serious injury or death.

Your right to patient safety information applies to private and public health
providers. These include:

  * The HSE 
  * Private Hospitals 
  * Private health and social care providers such as GPs, Dentists and Pharmacists 
  * Other HSE funded organisations 

They must also notify the appropriate regulatory body such as the [ Health
Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) ](https://www.hiqa.ie/) , or the [
Mental Health Commission (MHC)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/mental-
health/mhttps:/www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/mental-
health/mental-health-commission/ental-health-commission/) .

###  **Right to request a review of cancer screening results**

You must be told before or at the time of the cancer screening of your right
to request a review of your screening results completed by the [ HSE’s
National Screening Service
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/cancer-
services/cancer-services/#12894a) .

You also have the right to be told the outcome of this review.

This is known as a Part 5 review and is part of the HSE open disclosure
policy. [ Read more about open disclosure and patient safety on the HSE
website ](https://www2.healthservice.hse.ie/organisation/qps-incident-
management/open-disclosure/information-and-resources-for-the-public/) .

##  How to access somebody else’s medical records

You can use FOI to access the medical information of:

  * Your child if you are the parent or guardian 
  * An adult you care for if they are unable to exercise their rights 

The head of the public body will only grant access to the records if they
consider it is in the best interests of your child or person you care for.

####  Can I access a person's medical records after they die?

You can access the medical records of a person who is dead if you are:

  * The personal representative administering the estate of the person who died 
  * Performing some legal function related to the person who died or their estate 
  * Their spouse (this includes a divorced spouse or cohabitee), next of kin or another person that the head of the public body considers appropriate 

##  Accessing medical information in court

You may access medical records for court cases if there is a court order of
_discovery_ . The court may order a hospital or doctor to disclose or
_discover_ documents or medical records to a plaintiff's advisers if those
documents are relevant to the court case.

##  Further Information

You can read the health workers' ethical duty with regard to confidentiality
in the Medical Council guidelines [ Guide to Professional Conduct and Ethics
for Registered Medical Practitioners ](http://www.medicalcouncil.ie/News-and-
Publications/Reports/Guide-to-Professional-Conduct-Ethics-8th-Edition.html) .

###  Health Service Executive

National Information Line

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 8am-8pm, Saturday, 9am-5pm. Sundays and
Bank Holidays closed.

**Locall:** 1800 700 700

**Homepage:** [ https://www2.hse.ie/services/contact-the-hse/
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/contact-the-hse/)

###  Data Protection Commission

21 Fitzwilliam Square South,  
Dublin 2,  
D02 RD28  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 09:30 – 17:30, Monday–Friday (closed 13:00-14:00)

**Tel:** 01 765 0100 or 1800 437 737

**Homepage:** [ http://www.dataprotection.ie ](http://www.dataprotection.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://forms.dataprotection.ie/contact
](https://forms.dataprotection.ie/contact)

**Email:** [ info@dataprotection.ie ](mailto:info@dataprotection.ie)

###  Office of the Information Commissioner

6 Earlsfort Terrace  
Dublin 2  
D02 W773  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 9.15 am to 5 pm, Monday to Friday

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 639 5689

**Homepage:** [ http://www.oic.ie ](http://www.oic.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.oic.ie/contact/ ](http://www.oic.ie/contact/)

**Email:** [ info@oic.ie ](mailto:info@oic.ie)

###  Freedom of Information Central Policy Unit

Department of Public Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform

Floor 3, 7-9 Merrion Row  
Dublin 2  
D02 V223

**Tel:** 01 604 5245

**Homepage:** [ http://foi.gov.ie/ ](http://foi.gov.ie/)

**Email:** [ cpu@per.gov.ie ](mailto:cpu@per.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/access-to-medical-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Access%20to%20medical%20records&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/access-to-medical-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/access-to-medical-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Access%20to%20medical%20records&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/access-to-medical-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Access to Garda records_ ](/en/justice/law-and-rights/access-to-garda-records/)

Under data protection legislation you have the right to access personal
information which the Gardaí hold on you, except in certain circumstances.
Find out how to access your information.

1799.882

  * [ _How to access your personal data under the GDPR_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document explains how to access your personal data under data protection
laws and the GDPR.

1410.9796

  * [ _Consent to medical and surgical procedures_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/consent-to-medical-and-surgical-procedures/)

As a general rule, informed consent must be given before medical and surgical
procedures can happen in Ireland. Find out more.

1102.8441

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

