**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for people with
disabilities ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/) > Day centres and day care

#  Day centres and day care

  * Introduction 
  * Services in day centres and day care 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

Day centres or day care centres in Ireland provide a range of social and
rehabilitative services for older people and people with disabilities.

Day centres include centres that provide day activities, such as recreational
and leisure facilities, and specialised clinic facilities that provide a
combination of medical and rehabilitation services. Availability of services
varies in different areas. Some day centres are provided directly by the [
Health Service Executive ](http://hse.ie) (HSE) and some are provided by other
organisations on behalf of the HSE.

Access to day centres is by referral and the eligibility conditions vary from
area to area.

###  **Deferral of day service placement**

If you are a young person with disabilities leaving school or rehabilitative
training, you can defer your placement in a day service for up to 5 years.
This means that you can explore other options while keeping your place in a
day service.

This 5-year deferral is available to all young people due to leave school or
rehabilitative training in 2024, and people who are already currently
deferred.

##  Services in day centres and day care

The main purpose of day centres and day care is to help older people and
people with disabilities to live in their communities and to promote
independent living. They also provide a support to carers.

The range of services available varies widely and can include any or all of
the following:

  * [ Rehabilitative training ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/rehabilitation-and-training-services-for-people-with-disabilities/)
  * Social skills for people with learning disabilities 
  * Personal care 
  * Health monitoring 
  * Meals 
  * [ Chiropody ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/chiropody-services/)
  * Laundry 
  * Advice for carers 
  * Transport to and from day centres 

##  Rates

There may be a small charge for transport and meals provided by day centres.

##  How to apply

Usually people are referred to day centres or day care services by their
family doctor (GP) or their [ public health nurse ](/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/public-health-nurses/) . Day services may be
recommended to people with intellectual disabilities or autism after an
assessment of need.

_**Page edited:** 14 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/day-
centres/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Day%20centres%20and%20day%20care&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/day-
centres/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/day-
centres/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Day%20centres%20and%20day%20care&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/day-
centres/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Youth Information Centres and Services_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/)

Youth Information Centres and Services provide free, confidential information
for young people and for people who work with young people.

1826.8845

  * [ _Regulation of residential care for older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-people/)

National quality standards are enforced in both public and private nursing
homes by HIQA, the Health Information and Quality Authority. Inspection
reports are available from them.

1298.6599

  * [ _Regulation of residential services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-care-people-with-disabilities/)

Residential services for people with disabilities must meet certain standards.
The Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) registers and inspects
these services.

1284.8663

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

