**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Alcohol and drug treatment services
](/en/health/health-services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/) > Age Card

#  Age Card

  * Introduction 
  * Who can apply for a National Age Card? 
  * How much does the Age Card cost? 
  * How to apply for an Age Card 
  * Replacing a lost or missing Age Card 

##  Introduction

If you are aged 18 or over you can apply for an Age Card to prove that you
have reached the legal age when purchasing alcohol.

The Age Card includes the following information:

  * Your name 
  * Your date of birth 
  * A photograph of you 
  * Relevant security features (such as a metal hologram, embossed symbol or encoded magnetic stripe) 

The Age card is a proof of age card and is not an identity card. This card can
only be used to show you have reached the legal age for purchasing alcohol. It
should not be used for any other purpose.

##  Who can apply for a National Age Card?

You can apply for an Age Card if you are 18 or over and live in Ireland.

##  How much does the Age Card cost?

The Age Card costs €10. It also costs €10 to replace a lost or missing Age
Card.

You must pay online when you are applying for an Age Card. You can use a debit
or credit card, or an age card voucher which you can buy in any [ post office
](http://www.anpost.ie/AnPost/at+your+local+Post+Office.htm) .

##  How to apply for an Age Card

Apply and pay for your Age Card online at [ www.agecard.ie
](https://www.agecard.ie) . You will receive an application form by post
containing your details within 3 working days of applying.

You must bring the application form to your [ local Garda Station
](https://www.garda.ie/en/contact-us/station-directory/) for authentication
within 3 months.

You must also bring the following 3 items:

  * Your birth certificate, your passport or your [ Irish Residence Permit Card ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-permission/information-on-registering/irish-residence-permit/)
  * One other form of identification 
  * One recent passport-sized photograph 

The Garda Station will send your application form and photograph to the
printers and you will get your Age Card within 10 working days.

You can track your application online provided you know your application form
number.

##  Replacing a lost or missing Age Card

If you have lost your Age Card, the application process and cost to replace
your card is the same as applying for a new Age Card (see 'How to apply'
above). You must report the loss or theft of your original card when
presenting your application at your local Garda Station.

_**Page edited:** 4 February 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/garda-age-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Age%20Card&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/garda-age-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/garda-age-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Age%20Card&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/garda-age-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of estate agents, auctioneers and management agents_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/regulation-of-property-services/)

The Property Services Regulatory Authority (PSRA) is responsible for licensing
and regulating property services providers in Ireland. This document described
their licencing and other functions

1338.0869

  * [ _Tusla - the Child and Family Agency_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/)

Tusla - the Child and Family Agency - is the State agency responsible for
improving the well-being and outcomes for children.

1272.4553

  * [ _Public health agencies_ ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-agencies/)

Some of the agencies and bodies that have a role in delivering and regulating
health services and promoting health in Ireland.

1227.0165

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

