**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Vaccinations ](/en/health/health-
services/vaccinations/) > Pneumococcal vaccination

#  Pneumococcal vaccination

  * Introduction 
  * What is pneumococcal disease? 
  * Pneumococcal vaccine 
  * Who can get the pneumococcal vaccine? 
  * How to get the pneumococcal vaccine 
  * Cost of the pneumococcal vaccine 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Pneumococcal disease is a serious type of bacterial illness. If it enters your
lungs or blood stream, it can be life-threatening (especially if you are old
or medically vulnerable). However, a pneumococcal vaccine (also called the
pneumonia vaccine) can help to protect you.

The HSE offers this vaccine free of charge for certain groups of people who
are at higher risk from the illness.

##  What is pneumococcal disease?

Pneumococcal disease is caused by bacteria called ‘streptococcus pneumoniae’.

It can sometimes lead to life-threatening illnesses, including:

  * Pneumonia 
  * Meningitis 
  * Septicaemia (sepsis) 

It can also cause less serious illness, such as localised infections such as
middle ear infections, bronchitis or sinusitis.

If you are infected by the bacteria, you can spread pneumococcal disease to
other people by sneezing or coughing. You can also spread it by being in close
contact with other people.

You can get pneumococcal disease at any age. However, elderly people, young
children, and people with long-term medical conditions are most at risk.

##  Pneumococcal vaccine

The pneumococcal vaccine can help to protect you against pneumococcal disease.
When you get the pneumococcal vaccine, your immune system will start to
produce antibodies. Then, if you come into contact with the bacteria, these
antibodies will fight it and stop you from getting sick.

You cannot get pneumococcal disease from the vaccine.

There are 2 types of pneumococcal vaccine available in Ireland.

  * PCV13 vaccine 
  * PPV23 vaccine 

**PCV13 vaccine**

The first type of vaccine is called ‘Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine’ (PCV13),
which is offered to all babies. [ Learn more about the childhood immunisation
programme ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-
children/) .

**PPV23 vaccine**

The second type of vaccine is called ‘Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine’
(PPV23). You should get the PPV23 vaccine if you are:

  * Over 65 years of age, or 
  * Over 2 years of age and have a long-term health condition 

##  Who can get the pneumococcal vaccine?

You are strongly advised to get the pneumococcal vaccine if you are:

  * Over 65 years 

Or, if you have:

  * Diabetes 
  * Coeliac disease 
  * Down Syndrome 
  * Chronic lung, heart, liver or kidney disease 
  * A chronic neurological disease 
  * Low immunity (because of an illness or ongoing treatment) 
  * HIV 
  * A missing or non-functioning spleen 
  * Cochlear implants (or about to get cochlear implants) 
  * A history of invasive pneumococcal disease (for children aged 2–5) 
  * Cerebrospinal fluid leaks 
  * An intracranial shunt 

##  How to get the pneumococcal vaccine

If you are in an at-risk group (listed above), you should talk to your GP
about getting the pneumococcal vaccine. If you do not have a GP, you can [
find a GP in your area ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/find-a-gp/) .

You may also get the vaccine from your practice nurse or pharmacist (subject
to availability).

If you are not in an at-risk group, you are not recommended to get the
pneumococcal vaccine.

##  Cost of the pneumococcal vaccine

If you are over 65, or if you are in an at-risk group, the pneumococcal
vaccine is free. However, you may have to pay your GP or practice nurse a
consultation fee.

You will not have to pay a consultation fee if you have a [ medical card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) or [ GP visit
card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) .

##  Further information

The [ National Immunisation Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/whoweare/) provides [ further
information on the pneumococcal vaccine
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/adult/pneumo/) .

Read more about [ vaccinations for children and young people.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/children-s-
health/vaccinations-for-children/)

_**Page edited:** 19 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/vaccinations/pneumococcal-
vaccination/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Pneumococcal%20vaccination&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/vaccinations/pneumococcal-
vaccination/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/vaccinations/pneumococcal-
vaccination/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Pneumococcal%20vaccination&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/vaccinations/pneumococcal-vaccination/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Freedom of movement in the EU_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-union/freedom-of-movement-in-the-eu/)

Freedom of movement is one of the basic aims of the European Union. This page
explains where this right comes from and how EU citizens can travel freely and
settle anywhere within the EU.

673.25244

  * [ _Flu vaccination_ ](/en/health/health-services/vaccinations/flu-vaccination/)

The flu vaccine can protect you against influenza each winter. The vaccine is
available free of charge to at-risk groups.

630.4093

  * [ _Vaccines for COVID-19_ ](/en/health/health-services/vaccinations/vaccines-for-covid19/)

This page gives information about COVID-19 vaccinations in Ireland. Find out
how to get a COVID-19 vaccine or COVID-19 booster vaccine.

618.37976

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

