**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Owning your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/home-owners/) > Rent a room tax relief scheme

#  Rent a room tax relief scheme

  * What is rent-a-room tax relief? 
  * Do I qualify for the rent-a-room relief scheme? 
  * Renting a room and your expenses and taxes 
  * Rental income and your social welfare payments and medical card 
  * How to apply 
  * Further information 

##  What is rent-a-room tax relief?

Rent-a-room relief lets you earn up to €14,000 per year tax-free if you rent
out a room in your home to private tenants. You can also get the relief if you
rent out a self-contained unit, such as a basement flat or a converted garage.

You claim the rent-a-room tax relief when you make your annual tax return, see
' [ How to apply ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/#10ea51) ' below.

If you rent out a room in your home, you have certain rights and
responsibilities. Our page on ' [ Renting out a room in your home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/) '
has more information about this.

##  Do I qualify for the rent-a-room relief scheme?

To qualify for rent-a room tax relief:

  * Your home must be located in Ireland. 
  * You must occupy your home as your sole residence. This means that it is your home for the greater part of the year and it is where people would normally expect to contact you. 
  * Your total rental income cannot be more than €14,000 per tax year (1 January to 31 December). This includes any money that your tenant pays for food, utilities, laundry or similar goods and services. 
  * The people you rent to must use the room on a long-term basis. This means stays of more than 28 days in a row. 

###  **Do I have to own the property to qualify?**

You do not have to own the property to qualify for rent-a-room relief. You
could be a tenant and be sub-letting to someone else. In this case, you should
check with your landlord that sub-letting is allowed.

Since 1 December 2023, [ local authority tenants are able to rent out a room
to a third level student ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/35486-housing-
for-all-update/) and earn up to €14,000 in rental income per year tax-free.
There are [ certain rules you need to follow
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/#1e7720) , including that you apply to
your local authority first.

###  **What is not covered by the rent-a-room relief scheme?**

You will not qualify for the relief if:

  * Your gross income from rent and related services is over €14,000. In this case, Revenue will treat the full rental income minus allowable expenses as part of your total income for tax purposes and this should be included in your tax return. 
  * You are renting the room in your home to your spouse, civil partner or partner, son or daughter. There is no restriction for other family members. 
  * You are an employee or office-holder in a company, and the company pays you to allow clients to use the room in your home on an occasional basis. 
  * You are renting the room to short-term guests for a period that does not exceed 28 consecutive days, for example, through an online accommodation booking site. 

####  Short-term lets

The relief does not apply to short-term lets. Short-term lets are lettings
that do not exceed 28 consecutive days. The occupants must be using the room
on a long-term basis.

For example, renting a room to a student for the academic year or for a one-
month course is covered, but providing accommodation to occasional visitors
for short periods, such as through an online accommodation booking site, is
not, as this income is not considered to be rental income. This is because the
visitors use the accommodation as guests.

If you normally rent out the room for the academic year and you rent it out
for short breaks during the summer as well, you must identify the income you
get from the short rentals separately from the income that qualifies for rent-
a-room relief, when making your tax return to Revenue.

[ You can read more about rent-a-room relief on revenue.ie
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/land-
and-property/rent-a-room-relief/index.aspx) .

##  Renting a room and your expenses and taxes

###  Your expenses

You cannot deduct expenses from your rental income when claiming rent-a-room
relief.

In some circumstances, choosing not to claim the rent-a-room relief for a
specific year could be beneficial. In that year, you could instead deduct
expenses from the rental income and use wear and tear allowances. See [
revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/land-and-property/rent-a-room-relief/how-is-relief-granted.aspx)
for examples of when this can be beneficial.

####  How to opt-out of rent-a-room relief

If you want to opt out of the rent-a-room relief in a particular tax year and
be taxed on the rental income instead, you must notify Revenue. You can notify
them:

  * Using MyEnquiries in [ MyAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/sign_in.html?execution=e1s1)
  * By writing to [ your local tax office ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx)

You must contact Revenue on or before the return filing date for that tax
year. Read more on [ revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-
credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/land-and-property/rent-a-room-
relief/index.aspx) .

###  Your PRSI, USC and income tax

The income you get from renting out the room must be included on your annual
income tax return. Rental income up to a maximum of €14,000 is exempt from:

  * PRSI 
  * Universal Social Charge 
  * Income tax 

###  Capital Gains Tax

Rent-a-room relief will not affect your exemption from [ Capital Gains Tax
(CGT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-gains-tax/) if you sell
your home.

###  **Accommodation Recognition Payment**

The [ Accommodation Recognition Payment (ARP) ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-
refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-payment/) is a tax-free payment
of €800 per month for hosting refugees from Ukraine. Payments made under the
ARP Scheme are exempt from income tax, USC and PRSI. You can qualify for both
the ARP and the rent-a-room relief scheme if you meet the criteria for both
schemes.

##  Rental income and your social welfare payments and medical card

###  Your social welfare payments

If you are getting a means-tested [ weekly social assistance payment
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-
payments/social-assistance-in-ireland/) , [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-
allow/) or [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) , you can get up to €269.23 a week (€14,000
per year) for renting out a room in your own home without it affecting your
social welfare payment.

This also applies if you are getting the [ Living Alone Increase ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/) , [ Household
Benefits Package ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-
benefits-package/) or [ Fuel Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/) . However, with Fuel
Allowance, the person renting the room from you must be getting a qualifying
social welfare payment or must qualify for Fuel Allowance in their own right.
You should check if renting a room in your home will affect any other
payments.

####  **Situations where my social welfare payment will be affected**

In certain situations rental income of less than €14,000 a year for renting a
room will be considered and can affect your social welfare payment. This
applies if you rent a room in your home:

  * As a short-term let. Short-term lets are stays that do not exceed 28 days in a row 
  * To an employee 
  * To an immediate family member 

Immediate family members in this situation include:

  * Your spouse, civil partner or partner 
  * Your child, or the spouse of your child 
  * Your parent, step-parent or parent-in-law 
  * Your sibling, including step-siblings or siblings-in-law 
  * Your grandparent or your grandchild 
  * Your aunt or uncle 
  * Your nephew or niece 

The [ ARP for hosting refugees from Ukraine
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.citizensinformation.ie%2Fen%2Fmoving-
country%2Fukrainian-refugees-in-ireland%2Faccommodation-recognition-
payment%2F&data=05%7C02%7CCIOFeedback%40citizensinformation.ie%7C271967fef6bc40c542bf08dc8c784df1%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638539695548703563%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=pd26FVChk290BA97PxG8xsRDStlmW3nqnhtGGafKAzY%3D&reserved=0)
is not taken into account in the means test for any grants or payments from
the Department of Social Protection or other public bodies. Payments under the
ARP are not included in the €269.23 weekly limit for social welfare payments.

###  Your medical or GP visit card

If you rent a room in your home, up to €14,000 of your annual rental income
will not be taken into account in the means test for your [ medical card or GP
visit card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/) .

##  How to apply

To claim rent-a-room relief you must enter your exempt rental income on your
annual tax return.

You can complete and submit your tax return form online using:

  * Revenue's [ myAccount Service ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) if you are a PAYE taxpayer (Form 12) 
  * Revenue [ Online Service (ROS) ](https://www.ros.ie) if you are self-employed or a PAYE taxpayer with other sources of income (Form 11) 

Alternatively, you can complete a hard-copy annual tax return and return the
completed form to [ your local tax office ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-
us/index.aspx) .

You will get the relief when you have made your tax return.

There is a [ four-year time limit ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-
credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/four-year-rule/index.aspx) to claim the relief.
For example, claims for 2020 must be made by 31 December 2024.

**Note:** If more than one person is entitled to the rent, the €14,000 rental
limit and the relief is divided between you. For example, if you and your
spouse both own the home you are renting out a room in.

##  Further information

If you need help, [ contact Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-
us/index.aspx) . The tax office can answer any queries you have and will help
if you have problems completing the form. You can also send queries to Revenue
through [ myEnquiries ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-
services/services/manage-your-record/myenquiries.aspx) .

_**Page edited:** 4 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rent%20a%20room%20tax%20relief%20scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Rent%20a%20room%20tax%20relief%20scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Renting out a room in your home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/)

If you rent out a room in your home, you have certain rights and
responsibilities. These are different depending on your home and the type of
accommodation you are renting.

3359.8574

  * [ _Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

1712.7766

  * [ _Introduction to income tax credits and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/introduction-to-income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

Tax reliefs reduce the amount of tax that you have to pay. Find out about the
different types of income tax relief that apply to your circumstances.

1566.5758

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

