**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ COVID-19
](/en/health/covid19/) > COVID-19 restrictions in Ireland

#  COVID-19 restrictions in Ireland

  * Current COVID-19 restrictions 

##  Current COVID-19 restrictions

All COVID-19 restrictions have ended.

The World Health Organisation have announced that COVID-19 is no longer a
global public health emergency.

You may be asked to wear a face mask when visiting some health and care
settings. The healthcare staff will let you know if you need to. If you have
symptoms of COVID-19, cold or flu, it may not be safe to visit a health or
care setting. Contact them for advice before visiting.

You should continue to [ self-isolate ](/en/health/covid19/covid19-isolation-
and-restricting/) if you have symptoms of COVID-19. You are advised to wear a
[ face mask ](/en/health/covid19/face-coverings-during-covid19/) on public
transport and in healthcare settings.

There is no requirement to show proof of vaccination or recovery to [ travel
to Ireland ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/travel-to-ireland-
during-covid/) . You also do not have to complete a Passenger Locator Form.

_**Page edited:** 10 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/living-
with-covid19-plan/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=COVID-19%20restrictions%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/living-
with-covid19-plan/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/living-
with-covid19-plan/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=COVID-19%20restrictions%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/living-
with-covid19-plan/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _COVID Restrictions Support Scheme_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/covid-restrictions-support-scheme/)

This page is a summary of the COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS).

1072.6201

  * [ _COVID-19 recovery and cost of living business supports_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-supports/)

This page summarises the supports for businesses as they recover from COVID-19
disruptions and deal with the rising costs of living.

828.27374

  * [ _Healthcare services in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-overview/)

Outlines the healthcare services available in Ireland. Covers GPs (family
doctors), fees for accessing healthcare services, prescription medication,
pharmacies, health centers, and both in-patient and out-patient hospital
services.

778.85986

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

