**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Children's health ](/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/) > Health and medical services for children

#  Health and medical services for children

  * Overview of children's health and medical services in Ireland 
  * Free or discounted health services for children 
  * Hospital charges for children 
  * Who do I contact? 

##  Overview of children's health and medical services in Ireland

If your child is under 18, they can get some health services for free, even if
you do not have a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) .

Your child will be able to get these medical services until they are aged 16,
and get some services until they are aged 18.

The free health services for children are usually available as part of:

  * [ Maternity and infant welfare services ](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/)
  * [ Health services for preschool children ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/health-services-for-preschool-children/)
  * [ School health services ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/school-health-services/)
  * [ Vaccination and immunisation services ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/)

If your child is aged 16 or over, they may give consent to surgical, medical
or dental procedures without the consent of a parent or guardian. Read about
consent to medical treatment for children.

##  Free or discounted health services for children

###  GP visit card for children

If your child is under 8, their visits to the GP are free in Ireland with the
[ GP visit card for children under 8 ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/gp-visit-cards-for-under-8s/) .

If your child is over 8 years, the [ GP visit card ](/en/health/medical-cards-
and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) is means tested.

###  Can my child get a medical card?

If you have a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , your child is included as a dependant on that card and
can get the same [ medical card services ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-
visit-cards/medical-card/) as you.

Your child may qualify for a medical card if they:

  * Are in residential care 
  * Living in Direct Provision 
  * Have been diagnosed with cancer within the last 5 years 
  * Are in [ foster care ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/)

###  Medical cards for young people over 16

If you are aged 16–25 and dependent on a parent or guardian, you can get a [
medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) if
your parent or guardian has a medical card. (This does not apply if your
parent or guardian’s income is above the means test limit and they have a
discretionary medical card.)

In the [ medical card means test ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card-means-test-under-70s/) , there is an allowance for children
aged over 16. This allowance is increased if the child is in third-level
education and is not getting a grant.

###  Prescribed drugs and medicines

Your child’s prescribe drugs and medicines are covered by the [ Drugs Payment
Scheme ](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/drugs-payment-scheme/) , up to the age
of 18 (or 23 if in full-time education).

A family member of any age can be included in the expenses if they have a
physical or intellectual disability or an illness and cannot fully maintain
themselves.

###  Disability services for children

If you are caring for a child with a disability, you can find a list of
children's disability services for children and young people up to 18 years on
our page on [ caring for a child with a disability ](/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/caring-for-a-child-with-a-disability/) .

###  Mental Health Services for children

If your child is aged under 18 and experiencing mental health difficulties,
the [ Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS
](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/mental-health/child-and-adolescent-mental-
health-services/introduction-to-camhs.html) ) may be able to support you.
CAMHS provide assessments and treatment for young people and their families
who are experiencing mental health difficulties such as depression, anxiety,
eating disorders and self-harm.

You must be referred by your GP to access CAMHS.

The HSE also have a list of [ other mental health supports
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/mental-health-supports-and-services/mental-
health-supports-and-
services.html?gclid=CjwKCAjwt7SWBhAnEiwAx8ZLarJIyrkI_JfwbNLMq0kqnAGbRhT_r6v6La4R7_hSLzSuzx2jV-
iE3xoCSgIQAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds) for children and young people.

##  Hospital charges for children

From 21 September 2022 in-patient services are free for children aged under 16
in all public hospitals.

If your child is admitted to a public hospital for treatment of health issues
found at child and school health checks, they do not have to pay the usual in-
patient public [ hospital charges ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-
hospital-services/hospital-charges/) .

There are a number of [ children's hospitals
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/acute-hospitals-division/hospital-
groups/childrens-hospital-group/) in Ireland. Children’s hospitals provide in-
patient services, out-patient services, day care, accident and emergency
services and specialist services for children. Entitlement to [ hospital
services ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/hospital-
services-introduction/) is the same in children’s hospitals as in public and
voluntary hospitals.

##  Who do I contact?

Your [ Local Health Office ](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) can
tell you about the services that are available in your area.

You can read information about the [ Assessment of Need for children with
disabilities ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-disabilites/) and [ children’s
health
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health_services/children_s_health/)
.

The HSE website has information on the [ National Healthy Childhood Programme
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/our-priority-
programmes/child-health-and-wellbeing/national-healthy-childhood-
programmenew.html) and further information for parents at [ mychild.ie
](https://www2.hse.ie/my-child/) .

Children in Hospital Ireland has information to help families [ prepare for
their child having inpatient or outpatient hospital care
](https://informationhub.childreninhospital.ie/) .

  

_**Page edited:** 11 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/child-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Health%20and%20medical%20services%20for%20children&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/child-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/child-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Health%20and%20medical%20services%20for%20children&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/children-s-health/child-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

2295.2542

  * [ _Health services for pre-school children_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/health-services-for-preschool-children/)

The HSE provides free health screening for pre-school children.

2070.957

  * [ _Inspector of Mental Health Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/inspector-of-mental-health-services/)

This document describes the Inspector of Mental Health Services who is
appointed under the Mental Health Act 2001.

1757.2637

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

