**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Mortgage arrears ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/) > Mortgage-to-rent scheme

#  Mortgage-to-rent scheme

  * What is the mortgage-to-rent scheme? 
  * Do I qualify for the mortgage-to-rent scheme? 
  * How does the mortgage-to-rent scheme work? 
  * How to apply for the mortgage-to-rent scheme 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is the mortgage-to-rent scheme?

If you are having trouble paying your mortgage, the [ mortgage-to-rent
](https://mortgagetorent.ie/) scheme lets you switch from owning your home to
renting it as a social housing tenant. Under the scheme, you choose to give up
ownership of your home to your lender. This means you will no longer own your
home or have any financial interest in it.

An [ approved housing body (AHB) ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) or approved private company then buys your
home from your lender and rents it back to you. You become a social housing
tenant, which means you pay an affordable rent based on your income. If your
income increases the rent increases. If your income falls the rent decreases.

Under the scheme, you become a social housing tenant with a right to have your
housing needs met by the local authority indefinitely. This means that if your
needs change, the local authority will provide alternative accommodation that
meets your changed needs. If your financial situation improves, you have an
option to buy your home back.

##  Do I qualify for the mortgage-to-rent scheme?

The mortgage-to-rent scheme is only for people whose mortgage is with a
private lender. There is a [ separate mortgage-to-rent option for local
authority borrowers in arrears ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/a2d81-local-
authority-mortgage-to-rent-lamtr-scheme/) .

To qualify for the mortgage-to-rent scheme, your mortgage, home and household
must meet the detailed eligibility criteria below. On 14 February 2022 some of
the [ qualifying criteria for the scheme changed
](https://www.housingagency.ie/news-events/minister-obrien-announces-
significant-improvements-mortgage-rent-
scheme#:~:text=Key%20changes%20to%20the%20MTR,is%20aged%2065%20and%20over) .
These changes are incorporated below and include new limits on the value of
homes that can access the scheme and the amount of positive equity allowed.

###  Your mortgage

  * You must be unable to make the repayments on your mortgage loan and your lender must have decided that this situation is unlikely to change in the future 
  * You must be engaging with your lender to try to find a solution 
  * You must have completed the [ Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-process/) with your lender 

###  Your home

  * In general, your property must be in negative equity. However, a property with a small amount of positive equity can be included in the scheme. The limit on the amount of positive equity allowed differs depending on where you live, see table below: 

**Location** |  **Maximum positive equity allowed**  
---|---  
Cork City, Dublin City, Dún Laoghaire Rathdown, Fingal, Galway City, Meath, South Dublin, Kildare, Wicklow  |  €35,000   
Cork County, Kerry, Kilkenny, Limerick City and County, Louth, Wexford, Waterford City and County  |  €30,000   
Carlow, Cavan, Clare, Donegal, Galway County, Laois, Leitrim, Longford, Mayo, Monaghan, Offaly, Roscommon, Sligo, Tipperary, Westmeath  |  €25,000   
  
  * Your property must suit your needs – you must not be over or under-accommodated in accordance with [ local authority guidelines ](http://www.housingagency.ie/sites/default/files/2019-05/Guidelines-Housing-People-Disability-2017.pdf) . However, the mortgage-to-rent scheme allows your home to have 2 more bedrooms than specified for your family size in the local authority guidelines. There is some flexibility on this for older people and people with disabilities. 
  * Depending on the type and location of your property, it must not exceed a certain value, see table below: 

**Type of property** |  **Location** |  **Maximum value**  
---|---|---  
House  |  Dublin, Kildare, Meath, Wicklow, Louth, Cork and Galway  |  €450,000   
Apartment or townhouse  |  Dublin, Kildare, Meath, Wicklow, Louth, Cork and Galway  |  €335,000   
House  |  Elsewhere in the State  |  €345,000   
Apartment or townhouse  |  Elsewhere in the State  |  €230,000   
  
###  Your household

  * You must [ qualify for social housing support ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/) in the local authority area that the home is located. As part of this requirement, your net household income must not exceed certain limits, depending on which part of the country you live in and how many adults and children there are in your household. The income limits for different locations and households are in [ this table ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fcb86-social-housing-support-table-of-income-limits-2-june-2016/) . Net household income is your household income after taxes and social insurance have been taken off. You must apply for social housing support **before** submitting an application to the mortgage-to-rent scheme. 
  * You must not own any other property or have assets in excess of €20,000. 
  * You must have a long-term [ right to remain in the State (pdf). ](http://www.housing.old.gov.ie/sites/default/files/migrated-files/en/Publications/DevelopmentandHousing/Housing/FileDownLoad%2C29412%2Cen.pdf)

###  Getting advice

You must get legal and financial advice before the mortgage-to-rent process
can go ahead.

Your lender will pay up to €500 for legal advice.

If you wish, your lender will also pay €250 for you to get financial advice
from an accountant on the [ Mortgage Arrears Information and Advice Service
panel
](http://www.keepingyourhome.ie/mortgage_arrears_information_and_advice_service/index.html)
.

The [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/mabs-service/) can provide debt advice, as well as general
information on the scheme.

##  How does the mortgage-to-rent scheme work?

Changing your status from owner to tenant of your home involves a complex set
of legal and financial arrangements, all of which must be signed off before
the transfer of property takes place.

When all these arrangements have been agreed, including the purchase price of
your home (see below) you voluntarily surrender possession of your home to
your mortgage lender. The lender immediately sells your home to a housing
association or approved private company, who will then rent it to you.

If an AHB buys the property they will own it and be your landlord. If an
approved private company buys your home they will own it, but your local
authority will be the landlord. See ‘Housing associations and approved private
companies’ below.

###  Purchase price of your home

Before your home can be sold to a housing association or private company, it
must be valued independently and the lender and the housing association must
agree a price. The price will be based on several factors, including the
market valuation of the property and the cost of any necessary repairs. If the
lender and the housing association or private company cannot agree a price,
the arrangement will not go ahead.

###  After the sale

The proceeds from the sale of your home will go towards your mortgage debt and
you come to an arrangement with your lender for the remaining balance that you
owe, if any. This remaining balance is now an _unsecured_ debt. (A _secured_
debt is a loan on which goods or property are available as security against
non-payment – for example a housing mortgage, where you offer the property as
security and it may be repossessed if you cannot pay the mortgage.)

You will no longer own your property but you can continue living in your home
as a social housing tenant and you will have a tenancy agreement with the
housing association, or the local authority if a private company buys your
home. Once the property is sold under the mortgage-to-rent scheme, the buyer
is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the property as set out in
your tenancy agreement.

If your financial situation improves, you will have an option to buy your home
back from the housing association or approved private company after 5 years,
or earlier if agreed.

###  Housing associations and approved private companies

Under the mortgage-to-rent scheme, your home can be bought by a housing
association or an approved private company. If a housing association buys your
home, they will own it and be your landlord. But, if an approved private
company buys your home, the private company will own your home, but your local
authority will be your landlord.

However, with both options you will be a social housing tenant and your rent
will be set at an affordable rate by the local authority. For more details on
the differences between these options, see [ mortgagetorent.ie
](https://mortgagetorent.ie/) .

###  Appeals

If your lender does not agree that you are suitable for the mortgage-to-rent
scheme, they must tell you why in writing. You can appeal to the lender’s
Appeals Committee under the [ Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP)
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-
process/) .

If the local authority decides that you are not eligible for social housing
support (which means that you cannot access the mortgage-to-rent scheme), you
can appeal this decision through the local authority’s internal appeals
system. If you are not happy with the outcome, you can contact the [ Ombudsman
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-
accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/) .

##  How to apply for the mortgage-to-rent scheme

Where appropriate, your lender will offer you the opportunity to apply for the
scheme and give you an application form for mortgage-to-rent. If you are
interested, you give consent in writing to your lender to submit your details
to a number of organisations involved in the scheme.

You then need to complete several steps:

  1. You apply for social housing support with your local authority. 
  2. You agree to surrender ownership of your home in exchange for a tenancy agreement with a housing association or local authority. 
  3. You complete your Mortgage to Rent application. 

The Housing Agency has published a Guide to the Mortgage to Rent Scheme.

##  Where to apply

Contact your mortgage lender to discuss your suitability for the mortgage-to-
rent scheme.

_**Page edited:** 15 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-to-rent-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Mortgage-to-
rent%20scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-to-rent-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-to-rent-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Mortgage-to-
rent%20scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-to-rent-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Alternative repayment arrangements for people in mortgage difficulty_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/alternative-mortgage-repayment-arrangements/)

Information on alternative repayment arrangements and other options for people
faced with mortgage arrears. Issues to consider when assessing your options.

1414.7928

  * [ _Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)

Overview of the employment schemes and other supports which encourage people
getting unemployment and certain other social welfare payments to take up
employment.

1342.1564

  * [ _Tenants' rights to stay in rented accommodation_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/types-of-tenancy/)

Security of tenure is a tenant’s right to stay in rented accommodation for a
set amount of time.

1335.0809

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

