**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) > [ Grants for
home renovations and improvements ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/) > Home Energy Upgrade
Loan Scheme

#  Home Energy Upgrade Loan Scheme

  * What is the Home Energy Upgrade Loan? 
  * What work is covered by the loan? 
  * Where can I get a Home Energy Upgrade Loan? 
  * How much can I borrow? 
  * What are the interest rates? 
  * Do I qualify for the loan? 
  * How do I apply for the Home Energy Upgrade Loan? 
  * Where can I find out more about the Home Energy Upgrade Loan? 

##  What is the Home Energy Upgrade Loan?

The Home Energy Upgrade Loan is a low-interest loan for homeowners who want to
make their property more energy efficient.

You must use the loan for home energy upgrades that are also funded by a [
home energy upgrade grant ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-
grants/home-energy-upgrade-loan/) from the Sustainable Energy Authority of
Ireland (SEAI).

You can get the loan for the home you live in, or a property you rent out.

The loan can be drawn down before you start the work. This removes some of the
upfront financial barriers to getting the upgrade works done.

Loans are available until 31 December 2026 or until the funding runs out.

If you can't afford to make your home more energy efficient, you may qualify
for a free energy upgrade with the [ SEAI Warmer Homes Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/) .

##  What work is covered by the loan?

You must be getting one of these SEAI home energy upgrade grants to get the
loan:

  * [ Better Energy Homes Grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-scheme/)
  * [ National Home Energy Upgrade Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)
  * [ Community Grant Scheme ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/community-grants/overview/)

The loans can be used for:

  * A deep retrofit of your home. This means upgrading many parts of your home’s structure and energy systems. 
  * 1 or 2 upgrades that will significantly improve the energy performance of your home. 

The work might include:

  * Insulating your home 
  * Installing a heat pump 
  * Upgrading your heating controls 
  * Installing solar power with solar panels 

**You cannot get the loan to install only solar panels** .

However, you can get funding for solar panels as part of a deep retrofit to
your home under the SEAI’s [ National Home Energy Upgrade Scheme
](http://national%20home%20energy%20upgrade%20scheme/%22%20/t%20%22_blank) or
[ Community Grant Scheme ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/community-
grants/overview/) .

If you are just getting a couple of upgrades with the [ Better Energy Homes
Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-
scheme/) , the loan will not cover solar panels. However, 25% of the amount
you borrow can be used for other changes to your home, that could include the
cost of your solar panels.

##  Where can I get a Home Energy Upgrade Loan?

**The loan is currently available from AIB, Bank of Ireland and Permanent
TSB.**

Some other lenders are in the process of signing up to the scheme and are
expected to begin offering the loan in 2024. These include:

  * Avant Money 
  * Clonmel Credit Union 
  * Connect Credit Union 
  * First South Credit Union 
  * Listowel Credit Union 
  * Naomh Breandan Credit Union 
  * North Midlands Credit Union 
  * Progressive Credit Union 

##  How much can I borrow?

You can borrow between €5,000 and €75,000 per property.

You can get loans for up to 3 properties or €225,000 per applicant.

Loan terms range from a minimum of one year up to a maximum of 10 years.

The loans are unsecured loans. This means that no security or personal
guarantee is needed.

##  What are the interest rates?

The interest rates are different depending on who you get your loan from. But
they will be lower than rates for regular personal loans. This is because the
interest rates are subsidised by the Government and the loans are backed by
the European Investment Bank.

The first banks participating in the scheme are offering rates that start from
3%.

##  Do I qualify for the loan?

To qualify for the loan, you must meet these conditions:

**Resident and property in Ireland**

  * You must be living in Ireland 
  * The property must be in the Republic of Ireland 
  * You must own the property. It can be the home you live in, or a property you rent out. 

**About the work on your property**

  * You must qualify for an [ SEAI home energy upgrade grant ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/home-energy-upgrade-loan/) for the work 
  * The upgrade work must achieve at least a 20% improvement in the home’s current [ Building Energy Rating ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/#18aa8e)
  * The work must be done by either: 
    * An [ SEAI registered One Stop Shop ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/one-stop-shop/)
    * Energy Partner 
    * Community Project Coordinator 
  * You must use the loan for home energy upgrade work: 
    * At least 75% of the loan must be used for energy efficiency measures 
    * 25% can be used for non-energy related works, like redecorating your home 

You cannot get a loan to fund work that has already been completed.

The SBCI has [ more information about the loan’s terms and conditions
](https://sbci.gov.ie/products/home-energy-upgrade-loan-scheme) .

##  How do I apply for the Home Energy Upgrade Loan?

**1\. Get an energy assessment for your property**

You must get one of these SEAI registered service providers to do an energy
assessment of your property:

  * [ **SEAI Registered One Stop Shop** ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/one-stop-shop/registered-providers/)
  * [ **Energy Partner** ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/how-to-apply/energy-partners/)
  * [ **Community Project Coordinator** ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/community-grants/project-coordinator/)

When they have done the assessment, they will give you a Home Energy Summary
Report.

You can apply for the loan, if the upgrades recommended in the report could
lead to at least a 20% improvement in your home’s current [ Building Energy
Rating ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/#18aa8e) .

**2\. Get an SEAI home energy upgrade grant**

To get the low-cost loan, your upgrade project must be supported by an SEAI
grant. Your SEAI registered service provider will apply for one of these SEAI
home energy upgrade grants for you:

  * [ Better Energy Homes Grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-scheme/)
  * [ National Home Energy Upgrade Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)
  * [ Community Grant Scheme ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/community-grants/overview/)

You must qualify for one these grants to get the loan.

**3\. Apply for a Home Energy Upgrade Loan**

Contact one of the financial institutions that offers the Home Energy Upgrade
Home Loan. The Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland has a [ list of the
financial institutions ](https://sbci.gov.ie/products/home-energy-upgrade-
loan-scheme#energy-lenders) that currently offer the loan.

You will need to show the financial institution your Home Energy Summary
Report

Each participating financial institution uses its own credit criteria,
policies and procedures to decide if they will approve your loan application.

**4\. Begin the work on your property**

When your loan is approved, you can begin your home energy upgrade work.

##  Where can I find out more about the Home Energy Upgrade Loan?

You can find more information about the Home Energy Upgrade Loan Scheme on the
[ SEAI’s website ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/home-energy-
upgrade-loan/) and the [ SBCI’s website ](https://sbci.gov.ie/products/home-
energy-upgrade-loan-scheme) .

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/home-energy-
upgrade-loan-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Home%20Energy%20Upgrade%20Loan%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/home-energy-
upgrade-loan-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/home-energy-
upgrade-loan-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Home%20Energy%20Upgrade%20Loan%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/home-energy-
upgrade-loan-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Free energy upgrades (Warmer Homes Scheme)_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/)

This scheme provides free home energy upgrades to homeowners who get certain
social welfare payments.

3820.938

  * [ _Individual home energy upgrade grants (Better Energy Homes)_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-scheme/)

This scheme provides grants to help to increase the energy efficiency of
homes, including grants for home insulation.

3486.226

  * [ _Grants for a home energy upgrade_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)

This scheme provides grants to help to upgrade the energy efficiency of your
home to a BER rating of B2 or above.

3242.6196

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

