**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) > [ Housing
supports for older people and people with disabilities ](/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/) > Housing Aid for Older People Grant

#  Housing Aid for Older People Grant

  * Introduction 
  * What type of work can the grant be used for? 
  * Do I qualify for the grant? 
  * How much is the grant? 
  * What do I need to apply? 
  * How do I apply? 
  * What happens after I send in my application? 

##  Introduction

The [ Housing Aid for Older People Grant
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/6636c-housing-adaptation-grants-for-older-
people-and-people-with-a-disability/#housing-aid-for-older-people-grant) is
for essential repairs to improve the condition of an older person's home so
they can continue to live there. It is aimed at people aged 66 and older, who
are living in poor housing conditions. However, in cases of genuine hardship
the local authority may help people under the age of 66.

If you have a disability and your home needs to be adapted to make it more
accessible, the [ Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-
and-people-with-disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-
disability/) or the [ Mobility Aids Grant Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-
and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/mobility-aids-grant-scheme/) may be more suitable for you. These
grants are all administered by local authorities.

##  What type of work can the grant be used for?

The grant is for essential repairs to make it possible for an older person to
continue living in their home.

Essential repairs can include:

  * Repairing or replacing the roof 
  * Upgrading the electrical wiring 
  * Repairing or replacing the windows and doors 
  * Providing central heating 

You should check with your local authority to see what types of repairs they
will cover.

##  Do I qualify for the grant?

This means-tested grant is paid for essential work to privately-owned homes
where the older person either:

  * Owns the home, or 
  * Has a right to live in the home where the work will be done 

Your total gross household income is assessed to find out if you qualify for
the grant and what level of assistance you can get.

Household income is the gross annual income earned by:

  * All adults living in the home aged over 23 years (or over 18 and not in full-time education) 
  * The registered property owner and their spouse. (This income is not considered if your home is rented from a landlord, provided by an approved housing body (AHB) or is a communal residence.) 

The following is not taken into account when calculating your household
income:

  * €5,000 for each member of the household aged under 18 
  * €5,000 for each member of the household aged between 18 and 23 and in full-time education 
  * €5,000 if a relative is caring full-time for the person who the grant is for 
  * [ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/)
  * [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/)
  * [ Carer's Support Grant ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-support-grant/)
  * [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/)
  * [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)
  * [ Domiciliary Care Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/)
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
  * [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/)
  * [ Living Alone Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/)
  * Foster Care Grant 

##  How much is the grant?

The grant covers **some** of the cost of work needed, but not all of it. The
amount of money you get depends on your gross household income for the
previous tax year after any disregards and deductions are applied. The maximum
grant available is €8,000 or 95% of the cost of the work approved by your
local authority.

This maximum grant of 95% is available to people with annual household incomes
of less than €30,000. This reduces to 30% for those with annual household
incomes of €50,001 to €60,000. The following table shows the current rates.

**Maximum yearly household income** |  **% of costs** |  **Maximum grant**  
---|---|---  
Up to €30,000  |  95%  |  €8,000   
€30,000 - €35,000  |  85%  |  €6,800   
€35,001 - €40,000  |  75%  |  €6,000   
€40,001 - €50,000  |  50%  |  €4,000   
€50,001 - €60,000  |  30%  |  €2,400   
**Over €60,000** |  |  **No grant payable**  
  
**Example**

If your gross household income for the previous tax year is €45,000 after the
disregards and deductions are applied, your grant is 50% of the costs of the
work to a maximum of €4,000. This means that if the work on the home costs
€10,000 including VAT, the grant will only be €4,000 and not €5,000.

**A grant is not available if the household income is more than €60,000, after
the disregards and deductions are applied.**

##  What do I need to apply?

To apply for the Housing Aid for Older People Grant you must complete the
application form and provide certain evidence and supporting documents.

You must provide evidence:

  * Of your gross household income for the previous tax year 
  * That the [ Local Property Tax (LPT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax/) for your home is in order 
  * That your tax affairs are up-to-date 

You will also need to include further information depending on the type of
repairs you need. If you need:

  * Roof repairs, you should include a letter from your insurance company stating that these repairs are not covered under your policy 
  * To upgrade the electrical wiring in your home, you should include a report from an electrician describing the necessary repairs. This electrician must be registered with Safe Electric. 
  * To replace an existing central heating system, you should include a report from a heating contractor saying that the existing heating system is ‘beyond economic repair’. This means that it is more cost effective to replace the heating system than repair it. 

You do not need any medical documents for this grant, as it is based on the
condition of your home, and how urgently the repairs are needed. However, if
your application is urgent due to a medical condition, your doctor will need
to complete the Doctor’s Certificate section of the application form.

##  How do I apply?

You can [ download the application form from gov.ie
](https://assets.gov.ie/119595/fb68af61-2429-414e-8f61-95ddc380f8ec.pdf) or
from your local authority’s website. You can also get the form from your local
authority. This application form is used to apply for 3 different grants which
are available to older people and people with disabilities to adapt their
homes. For this grant, you need to complete the sections of the form for the
Housing Aid for Older People Grant.

The form contains detailed information about the scheme’s conditions and a
checklist of documents that you must include. You can also contact the Housing
Section of [ your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for information
about the eligibility rules in your area, which may differ from those in other
local authority areas.

##  What happens after I send in my application?

When the local authority receives your application, they will:

  * Review your application to ensure it is complete 
  * Schedule a technician to visit your home to see if it is possible to do the work 
  * Write to you to let you know if your application has been successful and the amount you have been approved for. (The grant will not be paid if you start work before you get grant approval.) 
  * Ask you to send information from the contractor doing the work. This includes a quote for the work and the contractor’s tax reference number. 
  * Ask for the bank account details that the grant will be paid into when the work is completed 

If your application for the grant is unsuccessful, you can appeal the
decision. The appeal must be in writing and clearly explain why you are
appealing. You must make the appeal within 3 weeks of the decision. A local
authority official who was not involved with the original assessment will
assess your appeal and contact you with the result. This could take up to 6
weeks.

###  Getting the work done safely

Under Regulations governing safety, health and welfare at work, homeowners
must ensure that construction work on their home is carried out by competent
people. The [ Health and Safety Authority ](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/) has
published a useful [ Guide for Homeowners: Getting construction work done
safely (pdf)
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Construction/homeowners_guidance.pdf)
and some [ Frequently Asked Questions
](http://www.hsa.ie/eng/Your_Industry/Construction/Construction_FAQ's/Homeowners_FAQs.html)
.

_**Page edited:** 29 March 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Housing%20Aid%20for%20Older%20People%20Grant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Housing%20Aid%20for%20Older%20People%20Grant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Housing for older people_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/older-people-housing/)

Schemes and grants for housing and home improvements for older people.

2072.787

  * [ _Regulation of residential care for older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-people/)

National quality standards are enforced in both public and private nursing
homes by HIQA, the Health Information and Quality Authority. Inspection
reports are available from them.

1847.5773

  * [ _Sport activities for older people_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/go-for-life/)

The Go for Life programme, is Ireland's national programme aimed at increasing
the level of participation by older people in sport and physical activity.

1796.4696

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

