**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Medical cards
and GP visit cards ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/) > GP visit
cards for children under 8

#  GP visit cards for children under 8

  * What is the GP visit card for children? 
  * What is covered by the GP visit card for children? 
  * Can my child get a free GP visit card? 
  * How to apply for a GP visit card for children 

##  What is the GP visit card for children?

If your child is under the age of 8, you can get a GP visit card for them.
With the GP visit card, your child can visit a participating GP (family
doctor) for free and get free specific assessments (see ‘What is covered’
below).

**Children aged 6 and 7 now qualify**

The GP visit card for children was initially only available for children under
the age of 6. On 11 August 2023, it was extended to children who are 6 and 7.
If your child is 6 or 7, you can [ register online for a GP visit card
](https://www.sspcrs.ie/portal/free-gp-care-web/pub) for them.

If your child turned 6 after 1 July 2023, their GP visit card will be extended
automatically by the HSE and you do not need to register again.

####  **Medical cards**

If your child already has a [ medical card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , you do not need to register them for a GP visit card.
If your family circumstances change and you are no longer eligible for medical
cards, you can then register your child for a GP visit card for children under
8.

##  What is covered by the GP visit card for children?

Free GP visits include visits to the doctor, home visits and out-of-hours
urgent GP visits for your child.

###  **Free medical assessments for children aged 2 and 5**

If your child has a GP visit card, they can get free medical assessments when
they are aged 2 and 5. These are preventive checks that include charting your
child’s age, weight and height, and taking any appropriate follow-up actions.

###  **Checks for children with asthma**

If your child has asthma, they will get free asthma checks and their
medication reviewed, to make sure that they are using their inhalers
correctly. You will also get a written plan to help you manage your child’s
asthma.

Children over 2 will get their first free asthma check when they are
diagnosed. The second check is arranged 3 months after their first check.

Your child’s asthma will be checked for free every year until they are 8.

###  **What is not covered by the GP visit card** **for children under 8?**

The GP visit card does not cover **medicines** or **hospital care** .

However, all in-patient hospital services are free for children under 16 in
all public hospitals. Read more about [ hospital charges for children.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/children-s-
health/child-health-services/#73349e)

If you have a [ Drugs Payment Scheme card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/drugs-
payment-scheme/) , you and your family only have to pay a maximum of €80 each
month for drugs and medicines. This includes the medicines your child may be
prescribed.

##  Can my child get a free GP visit card?

Your child can get a free GP visit card if they are:

  * Aged under 8 years 
  * Ordinarily resident in Ireland 

‘Ordinarily resident’ means your child currently lives in Ireland and intends
to live in Ireland for at least one year.

###  **When does the GP visit card expire for children?**

Your child is included in the scheme until the end of the month of their 8th
birthday. For example, if your child turns 8 in July, their card will expire
on 31 July. The card shows the date that it is valid until.

##  How to apply for a GP visit card for children

If you have any questions before registering, you can phone Lo-call 0818 22 44
78.

To register, you will need:

  * Your [ Personal Public Service (PPS) number ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/)
  * The child's PPS number (see below) 
  * Your choice of participating GP 

**Your child’s PPS number**

You are sent [ your child’s PPS number
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/personal-public-service-number/#55e080) after registering their birth.
If you do not have a PPS number for your child, contact Client Identity
Services in the Department of Social Protection on Lo-call 0818 927 999, or
email [ cis@welfare.ie ](mailto:cis@welfare.ie) .

If you do not have a PPS number and your baby is under 2 months of age, you
can register and leave the PPS number blank and the HSE will write to you
separately to get it.

####  Choosing your family doctor (GP)

Check if your [ GP is taking part in the scheme (pdf)
](https://www.sspcrs.ie/libr/html/UGP_GPlist_by_LHO.pdf) . You may also need
to check if your chosen GP is accepting new patients. If they are not, you
must pick another GP. You can also check if they are accepting online
applications on that list.

###  **Apply by post or email**

If a GP does not accept online registrations, or if you want to post or email
the form, you can download the [ GP Visit Card for under 8s Registration Form
(pdf) ](https://assets.hse.ie/media/documents/under-8s-GP-visit-
card-4-9-23.pdf) bring it to the GP to sign, and then email it to [
pcrs.applications@hse.ie ](mailto:pcrs.applications@hse.ie) or post it to:

###  HSE

PO Box 12629  
Dublin 11

**Email:** [ pcrs.applications@hse.ie ](mailto:pcrs.applications@hse.ie)

###  **Register online**

Before you register online, [ check this list to see if your chosen GP accepts
online registrations ](https://www.sspcrs.ie/libr/html/UGP_GPlist_by_LHO.pdf)
. Then you can apply [ on the HSE website ](https://www.sspcrs.ie/portal/free-
gp-care-web/pub) .

After you apply, you will get an email with a copy of your child’s
registration details attached.

Print this email attachment, bring it to your GP to sign and then post it to:

###  Health Service Executive

PO Box 11745  
Dublin 11  
D11 XKF3

**Tel:** 01 864 7100

**Locall:** 0818 22 44 78

**Homepage:** [ http://www.medicalcard.ie ](http://www.medicalcard.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www2.hse.ie/services/medical-cards/contact-
medical-cards-service.html ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/medical-
cards/contact-medical-cards-service.html)

**Email:** [ clientregistration@hse.ie ](mailto:clientregistration@hse.ie)

###  **Lost GP visit card**

If you have lost your card you can request a replacement by phoning Lo-call
0818 22 44 78 or emailing [ ClientRegistration@hse.ie
](mailto:ClientRegistration@hse.ie) . Include your child’s name, address and
date of birth.

_**Page edited:** 11 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards-for-
under-8s/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=GP%20visit%20cards%20for%20children%20under%208&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards-for-
under-8s/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards-for-
under-8s/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=GP%20visit%20cards%20for%20children%20under%208&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards-for-
under-8s/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Examples of calculating eligibility for GP visit card for under 70s_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/examples-of-calculating-eligibility-for-gp-visit-card-for-under-70s/)

Case study showing how to calculate your income and allowable expenses for a
GP visit card if you are aged under 70.

2618.445

  * [ _Under 70s means test for medical card and GP visit card_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-under-70s/)

How your income is assessed for the medical card and GP visit card if you are
under 70 years of age.

2556.81

  * [ _GP visit cards_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/)

Unless you have a medical card or GP visit card, visits to family doctors are
not free. What is a GP visit card and how can you apply?

2518.97

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

