**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Planning
permission ](/en/housing/planning-permission/) > Development plans

#  Development plans

  * What is a development plan? 
  * Do national plans influence local development plans? 
  * Can I give feedback about a development plan? 
  * Can a development plan influence my application for planning permission? 
  * More information on development plans 

##  What is a development plan?

A development plan describes how your local authority will develop and use
particular areas in your local authority area, for example:

  * Residential areas 
  * Commercial areas 
  * Industrial areas 
  * Recreational areas 
  * Agricultural areas 

It also sets out the development objectives for your local authority area,
such as plans to improve roads and local amenities.

A development plan is made up of a written statement and series of maps.

###  How long does a development plan last?

A development plan lasts for 6 years. Local authorities must begin work on a
new development plan 4 years after the start date of the last plan.

The [ Planning and Development Bill 2023
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2023/81/) intends to extend the life
of development plans from 6 years to 10 years, with a review after 5 years.
This suggested timeframe will line-up with when Census data is available to
allow for a more strategic approach to planning. The Planning and Development
Bill needs to be passed for this change to come in.

##  Do national plans influence local development plans?

Local development plans must be compatible with national and regional planning
strategies, including:

  * The [ National Planning Framework ](https://npf.ie/) , which sets out the national strategy for developments. 
  * The Regional Spatial and Economic Strategies, which detail plans for the 3 regional areas in Ireland 
  * The [ National Climate Action Plan ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/79659-climate-action-plan-2024/) , which sets out how we will meet our greenhouse gas emission targets 

Each development plan is examined by the [ Office of the Planning Regulator
](https://www.opr.ie/) to ensure that it does not go against any national or
regional strategies.

Development plans must also have an [ environmental report
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/climate-
change/environmental-impact-assessment/#l6a79a) that highlights any
significant environmental effect the plan may have.

##  Can I give feedback about a development plan?

Yes. [ Local authorities ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-
authorities/) look for feedback from the public when they are working on a new
development plan.

###  **When can I give feedback about a development plan?**

When a new development plan is being prepared, your local authority will
inform the public that they intend to review the plan. They will do this
using:

  * Local or national media 
  * Social media 
  * Other web-based channels 

You can make observations, submissions and suggestions for the development
plan at this time.

The local authority then publishes a notice to say that a draft plan is
available. This plan is put on public display for at least 10 weeks. You can
make submissions on what the local authority is proposing at this stage. If
applicable, you can also participate at the amended draft plan stage.

Some organisations in your area are consulted and asked to give any specialist
advice and observations before the plan is finalised. For example, some state
agencies and voluntary and community organisations.

Local authorities may also hold public consultations about development plans.
They can do this [ online or in person
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/act/27/enacted/en/print.html) .

All submissions that are made within the specified timeframes must be
considered before the final development plan is adopted.

##  Can a development plan influence my application for planning permission?

All planning applications in your area are measured against the local
development plan for your area. Planning permission will normally only be
given if your application aligns with the development plan.

For example, the plan will contain different residential or industrial areas.
So, developments that fit with how these areas have been designated may get
planning permission.

If you want to apply for planning permission, especially to build a house, you
should look at the development plan in your area first.

##  More information on development plans

Find out more about the [ planning system in Ireland (pdf)
](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-
Leaflet-1-Introducing-the-Planning-System.pdf) .

Gov.ie have a useful document on [ Development Plans - Guidelines for Planning
Authorities (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/228826/6e26204a-ffd0-42a4-b868-097d647e537f.pdf) .

The Office of the Planning Regulator have also published a [ Guide to the
Development Plan (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2022/10/Planning-Leaflet-2-A-Guide-to-the-Development-
Plan.pdf) .

You can also contact someone from [ your local authority
](https://www.housing.gov.ie/local-government/administration/local-
authorities/local-authorities) for more information.

_**Page edited:** 12 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/development-plans/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Development%20plans&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/development-plans/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/development-plans/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Development%20plans&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/development-plans/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Education, Training and Development Option_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/education-training-and-development-option/)

You can take part in certain short education, training or development courses
and keep your jobseeker's payment. Find out more.

1191.4083

  * [ _Volunteer development workers and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/working-abroad/voluntary-development-work-abroad-and-social-insurance/)

Irish citizens who have spent time working in a developing country may qualify
for Credited Social Insurance Contributions which can be used to claim social
welfare payments when they return to Ireland.

1165.4586

  * [ _Environmental assessments for projects and plans_ ](/en/environment/climate-change/environmental-impact-assessment/)

The environmental impact of certain projects, plans and programmes must be
assessed before they can go ahead. This assessment is done using either an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or a Strategic Environmental Assessment
(SEA) .

1086.914

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

