**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Renting a
home ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/) > [ Help with renting
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/) > Cost Rental Tenant in Situ
Scheme

#  Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme

  * What is the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme? 
  * Do I qualify for the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme? 
  * How do I apply for the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme? 
  * Useful contacts 

##  What is the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme?

This scheme allows the [ Housing Agency ](https://www.housingagency.ie/) to
buy rental properties from private landlords who are selling, so the Housing
Agency can continue to rent these properties to the tenants who are living
there.

You can access the scheme if you are a private tenant who has received a valid
[ notice of termination ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/if-your-landlord-wants-
you-to-leave#lab681) and you are at risk of homelessness because your landlord
is selling.

If the Housing Agency buys your rented home from your landlord, the Housing
Agency will become your landlord. They will work with independent
organisations, such as [ approved housing bodies ](/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) to manage and maintain
these homes.

You will pay the same rent that you paid your previous landlord. However, it
is intended that the scheme will move to a [ cost rental
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/cost-rental-housing/) model in
the future, where rents would be lower than market rents.

The [ government announced this scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/6ab3a-government-counter-motion-on-the-private-members-business-
motion-re-eviction-ban/) as part of measures intended to help people whose
tenancies ended when the winter eviction ban ended. It began on 1 April 2023.

###  Separate scheme for people getting HAP or on RAS

There is a separate Tenant in Situ Scheme if you are getting the [ Housing
Assistance Payment ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/housing-
assistance-payment/) or are on the [ Rental Accommodation Scheme
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-scheme/)
and have a landlord who is selling the home you are renting. With this scheme,
the local authority can buy the home from the landlord and you can continue to
rent it from the local authority. You should contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) about this
scheme.

##  Do I qualify for the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme?

You can access the scheme if you are a private tenant who has received a valid
notice of termination because your landlord is selling and:

  * You are unable to buy the property from your landlord or do not want to 
  * You are at risk of homelessness 
  * You have a long-term right to live in Ireland 
  * You are not getting social housing support, such as the Housing Assistance Payment or Rental Accommodation Scheme 
  * You do not own other residential property 
  * Your net household income is below €66,000 per annum for Dublin and €59,000 for everywhere else in the country. These [ income limits were increased from €53,000 nationwide on 1 August 2023 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/18146-new-income-eligibility-limits-for-affordable-cost-rental-take-effect/) . (Net income is the amount you are left with once income tax, Universal Social Charge, Additional Superannuation Contribution (ASC) and PRSI are deducted from your income.) 

##  How do I apply for the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme?

Contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to make an
appointment with the Housing Officer. They will assess if you qualify for this
scheme or for other housing supports.

When you meet the Housing Officer you should bring:

  * Your valid notice of termination 
  * Proof of your household's income 
  * Evidence that you have a long-term right to live in Ireland 

If you qualify for the Cost Rental Tenant in Situ Scheme, the local authority
will give your information to the Housing Agency along with details about the
rental property. The Housing Agency will work with you and your landlord to
try and buy the property.

If you have questions about the scheme, you can contact the Housing Agency at
[ tenantinsitu@housingagency.ie ](mailto:tenantinsitu@housingagency.ie) .

The Housing Agency also has [ information about the scheme on their website
](https://www.housingagency.ie/news-events/cost-rental-tenant-situ-crtis-
scheme) .

##  Useful contacts

###  Housing Agency

53 Mount Street Upper  
Dublin 2  
D02 KT73  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 656 4100

**Fax:** +353 1 656 4101

**Homepage:** [ https://www.housingagency.ie/ ](https://www.housingagency.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@housingagency.ie ](mailto:info@housingagency.ie)

_**Page edited:** 2 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/help-with-renting/cost-rental-tenant-in-situ-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Cost%20Rental%20Tenant%20in%20Situ%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/help-with-renting/cost-rental-tenant-in-situ-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/help-with-renting/cost-rental-tenant-in-situ-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Cost%20Rental%20Tenant%20in%20Situ%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/help-with-renting/cost-rental-tenant-in-situ-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Cost rental housing_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/cost-rental-housing/)

Cost rental provides affordable rented accommodation to people on middle
incomes. Cost rental homes have reduced rent and tenants have long-term
security of tenure.

1835.865

  * [ _Rental Accommodation Scheme_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-scheme/)

The Rental Accommodation Scheme is run by local authorities for people getting
Rent Supplement for more than 18 months.

1638.0114

  * [ _Tenants' rights to stay in rented accommodation_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/types-of-tenancy/)

Security of tenure is a tenant’s right to stay in rented accommodation for a
set amount of time.

1596.0303

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

