**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Buying a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/) > Insurance protection on mortgages

#  Insurance protection on mortgages

  * Introduction 
  * What is mortgage protection insurance? 
  * Types of mortgage protection insurance 
  * What is mortgage repayment protection insurance? 

##  Introduction

When you [ get a mortgage ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-
home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) to buy your home, you need to consider how it
will be paid off if you die. You should also consider how you will make your
mortgage repayments if your income falls, due to illness, unemployment or
other reasons.

There is insurance to cover these situations:

  * **Mortgage protection insurance** pays off your mortgage in full if you die before the mortgage has been fully paid 
  * **Mortgage repayment protection** covers your repayments for a set amount of time in certain circumstances 

You must take out mortgage protection insurance when you get a mortgage,
except in certain circumstances, see below. Mortgage repayment protection
insurance is usually optional.  

##  What is mortgage protection insurance?

When you get a mortgage to buy your home, you will generally need to take out
mortgage protection insurance. This is a particular type of life assurance
that is taken out for the term of the mortgage. It pays off the mortgage if
you, or someone you have the mortgage with, dies.

[ The lender is legally required
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/act/24/section/126/enacted/en/html#sec126)
to make sure that you have mortgage protection insurance before giving you a
mortgage. There are some exceptions to this, see below.

If your lender offers a particular insurance policy, you do not have to buy
it. You can shop around for a mortgage protection policy that suits your
needs. Your lender cannot refuse you a mortgage because you don't buy the
policy it offers.

Mortgage protection should be paid on a joint life, first death basis. This
means that the mortgage is repaid when the first person dies if you are a
couple.

You should review your mortgage protection policy regularly and ensure that
you take out additional cover, if necessary. For example, you may need
additional cover if you extend the term of your mortgage. You must keep your
payments up to date. If you go into arrears, the policy may lapse.

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) publishes [ detailed
information on mortgage protection insurance
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/mortgage-protection-
insurance/) .

**Exceptions to the legal requirement to have mortgage protection insurance**

You do not have to take out mortgage protection insurance if:

  * You are over 50 years old 
  * The mortgage is not on your principal private residence (your home) 
  * You already have enough life insurance to pay off the home loan if you die 
  * You cannot get this insurance, for example, because of a current serious illness or dangerous job 

Some lenders may insist that you take out mortgage protection insurance as a
condition of giving you a mortgage, even if there is no legal requirement in
your case.

If you die without mortgage insurance protection, there will be no insurance
policy to pay off the mortgage. This means that the joint owner or your
beneficiaries will have to continue repaying the mortgage.

The requirement to take out mortgage protection and the exemptions to this are
set-out in [ Section 126 of the Consumer Credit Act 1995
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0024/sec0126.html#sec126) .

###  **Mortgage protection and cancer survivors**

Since, 6 December 2023, a [ code of practice on mortgage protection insurance
for cancer survivors ](https://www.insuranceireland.eu/news-and-
publications/news-press-release/new-insurance-ireland-code-of-practice-for-
underwriting-mortgage-protection-insurance-for-cancer-survivors-to-take-
effect-from-december-6th-2023) applies. This means companies that provide
mortgage protection insurance can ignore your cancer diagnosis if your
treatment finished more than 7 years ago, or more than 5 years if you were
diagnosed when you were under 18. The code covers you if you are applying for
insurance cover of up to â‚¬500,000.

##  Types of mortgage protection insurance

There are different types of mortgage protection cover. For example, you can
get:

  * **Reducing term cover** : The amount that this policy covers reduces as you pay off your mortgage and the policy ends when the mortgage is paid off. Your premium does not change, even though the level of cover reduces. This is the most common and cheapest form of mortgage protection. 
  * **Level term cover** : The amount you are insured for remains the same for the term of the mortgage. So, if you die before your mortgage is paid off, the insurance company will pay out the original amount you were insured for. This will pay off the mortgage and any remaining balance will go to your estate. 
  * [ **Serious illness cover** ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/serious-illness-insurance/) : You can add serious illness cover to your mortgage insurance policy. This means your mortgage will be paid off if you are diagnosed with and recover from a serious illness that is covered by your policy. It will also be paid off if you die. This is more expensive than other types of cover. 
  * **Life insurance cover** : You can use an existing life insurance policy as mortgage protection insurance. You can only do this if the life insurance policy provides enough cover and is not assigned to cover another loan or mortgage. 

##  What is mortgage repayment protection insurance?

Mortgage repayment protection insurance is a type of payment protection
insurance. It will repay your mortgage for a certain amount of time if your
income is reduced because you have an accident or are made redundant, or for
any other reason covered by the particular policy. This type of insurance is
usually optional and will typically cover payments for 12 months.

You should check with your mortgage lender, insurance broker or insurance
company if you are uncertain about whether you have mortgage repayment
protection insurance. You should also check exactly what it covers and ensure
that it suits your situation.

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission publishes detailed
information on [ payment protection insurance
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/payment-protection-insurance/)
.

_**Page edited:** 6 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-
mortgages/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Insurance%20protection%20on%20mortgages&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-
mortgages/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-
mortgages/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Insurance%20protection%20on%20mortgages&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-
mortgages/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Types of insurance_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/insurance/insurance/)

An overview of the different types of insurance available and where to get
more information.

1625.9126

  * [ _Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)

There are 3 different ways to legally marry in Ireland.

952.7553

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

927.98553

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

