**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for older people
](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/) > Moving from
home to long-term care

#  Moving from home to long-term care

  * Introduction 
  * Continue living at home with support 
  * Supports to improve your home 
  * Moving out to long-term care 

##  Introduction

As you become older, you may need or want to move from your home to long-stay
institutional care. Sometimes, if you are a younger person with a disability
or chronic illness, you may also face the problem of being unable to live at
home.

However, you may be able to stay at home with some additional supports. You
can read about [ housing options, supports and grants for older people
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-
and-people-with-disabilities/older-people-housing/) .

This page gives an overview of services, supports and entitlements that may
help you to continue living at home, or make the move to long stay care. Find
more detailed information through the links below.

##  Continue living at home with support

You may be able to continue living in your own home with some support from
your family, neighbours, and the health and community care services.

[ Community care services
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-
community/community-care-services/) from the Health Service Executive (HSE)
include:

  * [ Public health nursing ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/public-health-nurses/)
  * [ Home Support Service ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/home-support-service/)
  * Day centre services including medical and recreational activities 

###  **Supports for your carer**

Your carer may qualify for [ Carer’s Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/carers/carers-benefit/) or [ Carer’s Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/carers/carers-allowance/) , and a [ Carer's Support Grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/carers/carers-support-grant/) .

[ If you employ a carer, you may qualify for tax relief to help with the costs
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-
reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-for-employing-a-home-carer/) .

###  **Incapacity and planning ahead**

If you are becoming incapacitated, or if you want to make long-term plans for
incapacity in the future, you can read about:

  * [ Advance Healthcare Directives ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/advance-care-directives/)
  * [ Legal arrangements for incapacity ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-incapacity/)
  * [ Assisted Decision-Making ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/assisted-decision-making-act/)

##  Supports to improve your home

You may be eligible for schemes to improve the condition of your home.

For example, if your home needs to be adapted so you can continue living
there, you may qualify for a [ Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a
Disability ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-disability/) .

You can also apply to [ your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for [ Housing
Aid for Older Persons Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/) to improve the condition of
your home.

If your own home is not suitable for you to continue living there, you may be
able to get a specially adapted home for older people and people with
disabilities from your local authority, or from a [ voluntary housing
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) organisation.

Read more detail about [ housing supports and grants for older people
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-
and-people-with-disabilities/older-people-housing/) .

##  Moving out to long-term care

If your own home is no longer suitable, you can move to institutional care in
a public long-term care facility or a private nursing home.

**Public long-stay care** is provided in:

  * HSE nursing homes 
  * Geriatric hospitals 
  * Community nursing units 

**Private long-stay care** is provided in private nursing homes.

All nursing homes are regulated by the [ Health Information and Quality
Authority (HIQA) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-
people/) .

###  **How to pay for care in a nursing home**

You may be able to apply for the [ Nursing Homes Support Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-
services-for-older-people/fair-deal-scheme/) , also known as the “Fair Deal”,
which gives financial support to people who need long-term nursing home care.

You can also get [ tax relief on nursing home fees
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-
services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-for-dependent-
relatives/) .

###  **Choosing a nursing home**

Visit the HIQA website to [ find a nursing home in your area
](https://www.hiqa.ie/areas-we-work/find-a-centre/map) . You may also want to
read the HSE’s [ guide to choosing a nursing home
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/olderpeople/residentialcare/Nursinghomechecklist.pdf)
.

When you choose a nursing home, you will be asked to sign a contract for care.
This sets out the rights and responsibilities for you and for the nursing
home.

You can read [ information about what you are entitled to expect in a nursing
home contract for care ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/contracts-and-
services/nursing-homes/) from the Competition and Consumer Protection
Commission. It also explains what you can do if you think a contract for care
is unfair.

###  **Boarding out**

If your home becomes unsuitable, or you are unable or do not want to live on
your own, you may consider moving into a private homeowner's house.

This is called [ boarding out
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-
services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-people/) and is organised in
communities by the [ Health Service Executive
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/health-service-
executive/) (HSE).

_**Page edited:** 16 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/moving-from-home-to-long-term-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Moving%20from%20home%20to%20long-
term%20care&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/moving-from-home-to-long-term-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/moving-from-home-to-long-term-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Moving%20from%20home%20to%20long-
term%20care&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/moving-from-home-to-long-term-
care/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Moving to a new home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/moving-to-a-new-home/)

A summary of steps to take when moving house, including transferring
utilities, redirecting post and notifying schools.

1944.4213

  * [ _Long-Term Carers Contributions_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/long-term-carers-contributions/)

The Long-Term Carers Contribution Scheme makes it easier for people who take
time out of their working life to provide care to qualify for a State Pension
(Contributory).

1907.1082

  * [ _Checklist for people with disabilities and long-term illness_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/checklist-disability/)

Quick reference guide to services and entitlements for people with
disabilities or long-term illnesses and their families and carers

1786.9469

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

