**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for people with
disabilities ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/) > Rehabilitative training for people with disabilities

#  Rehabilitative training for people with disabilities

  * What is rehabilitative training? 
  * Who provides rehabilitative training? 
  * What will I learn in rehabilitative training? 
  * Will I get paid for doing rehabilitative training? 
  * How to apply for rehabilitative training 
  * More information 

##  What is rehabilitative training?

The purpose of rehabilitative training is to give people with disabilities an
opportunity to train and learn important life skills such as decision-making,
planning, social and basic work skills.

Rehabilitative training can help you if you have an intellectual disability,
autism, mental health difficulty or complex physical disabilities. It aims to
improve your quality of life and promote independence and participation in the
community.

Rehabilitative training can also be a stepping stone to more mainstream
education or other training options such as the [ Vocational Training
Opportunities Scheme ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) .

Rehabilitative training is not linked to employment.

##  Who provides rehabilitative training?

HSE Disability Services organise the delivery of rehabilitative training
services in accredited training centres that are run by the HSE or by service
providers contracted by the HSE.

The HSE Occupational Guidance Service can help you find a training course that
is suited to your needs. They will meet you and your family or advocate and
look at your options. The type of training and support may differ from centre
to centre.

[ Contact your local HSE Disability Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/disability/disabilityservicescounty.html)
or service provider for specific information on the programmes they run and to
check if you are eligible to attend.

In some cases, the local disability service provider may organise transport
and travel to and from your rehabilitative training service.

##  What will I learn in rehabilitative training?

Rehabilitative training courses vary in length, with some taking 2 to 4 years
to complete. The course will include individualised programme skills such as
learning how to:

  * Make choices and plans 
  * Make transitions and progress 
  * Access education and formal learning 
  * Maximise your personal independence 
  * Look after your health and wellbeing 
  * Access bridging programmes to [ vocational training ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/)
  * Access [ vocational training ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/vocational-training-opportunities-scheme/) and work opportunities 

You will be supported to develop and review your training plan during your
training in line with your needs and abilities.

##  Will I get paid for doing rehabilitative training?

No, but you can continue to receive your social welfare payments while
training. You may also be eligible for the Rehabilitative Training Bonus (see
below).

Check if you are eligible for weekly [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) or other [ social
welfare payments for people living with a disability ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/) .

###  **Rehabilitative Training Bonus**

If you are a trainee in foundation training or in a sheltered workshop you
will continue to get any social welfare payments you are entitled to, such as
Disability Allowance.

If you started rehabilitative training before 1 September 2019, you will get a
training bonus of â‚¬31.80 a week until you finish your placement. You cannot
get the Rehabilitative Training Bonus if you started rehabilitative training
after 1 September 2019.

If you are in training for less than 5 days a week, this will be paid on a
pro-rata basis. For example, if you attend 2 days per week, you will get 2/5
of the allowance.

##  How to apply for rehabilitative training

You should contact Disability Services in your [ Local Health Office
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) for more information on
rehabilitative training in your area. They will put you in touch with an
advisor from the HSE Occupational Guidance service.

If you are a school leaver it is important to plan in advance and contact the
HSE at least 13 months before you leave school.

##  More information

The National Council for Special Education (NCSE) has published a [ leaflet
for school leavers with information on rehabilitative training options (pdf)
](http://ncse.ie/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/NCSE-Post-School-Options.pdf) .

The Department of Social Protection provides supports through local employment
services offices and [ Intreo centres
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Intreo---Contact-
Information.aspx) . Read more about [ working with a disability
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-
disability/working-with-a-disability/) and the supports available.

Find out about [ employment supports for people with a disability
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/)
including:

  * [ Job Interview Interpreter Grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/job-interview-interpreter-grant-scheme/)
  * [ Grants to retain employees with disabilities ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/grants-to-retain-employees-with-disabilities/)
  * [ Disability Awareness Support Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/-disability-awareness-support-scheme/)
  * [ Workplace Equipment Adaptation Grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/workplace-equipment-adaptation-grant/)
  * [ Personal Reader Grants ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/personal-reader-grant/)
  * [ Wage Subsidy Scheme for people with disabilities ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/wage-subsidy-scheme-for-people-with-disabilities/)
  * [ Supported employment for people with disabilities ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-disabilities/) (EmployAbility) 

[ Find disability services in your area
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/disability/disabilityservicescounty.html)
.

###  National Council for Special Education

1-2 Mill Street  
Trim  
Meath  
C15 P2KC  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 6033200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ncse.ie/ ](http://www.ncse.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 12 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/rehabilitation-and-
training-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rehabilitative%20training%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/rehabilitation-and-
training-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/rehabilitation-and-
training-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Rehabilitative%20training%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/rehabilitation-and-
training-services-for-people-with-disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of residential services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-care-people-with-disabilities/)

Residential services for people with disabilities must meet certain standards.
The Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) registers and inspects
these services.

2655.3225

  * [ _Health services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/health-services-for-people-with-intellectual-physical-or-sensory-disabilities/)

A general introduction to the services provided by the Health Service
Executive (HSE) for people with disabilities.

2509.6902

  * [ _Supported employment for people with disabilities_ ](/en/employment/employment-and-disability/supported-employment-for-people-with-disabilities/)

The EmployAbility Service is a scheme aimed at assisting people with
disabilities to take up paid employment.

2491.0518

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

