**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Local
authority and social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/) > Your rights as an approved housing body tenant

#  Your rights as an approved housing body tenant

  * What are my rights if I am renting from an approved housing body? 
  * How are my rights different to a tenant in private rented housing? 
  * Who do I contact if I have an issue? 

##  What are my rights if I am renting from an approved housing body?

If you are a tenant of an [ approved housing body ](/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) or other voluntary
housing organisation, your tenancy is covered by residential tenancies
legislation. This means that you have most of the same rights and
responsibilities as a tenant in private rented housing. For example:

  * Your landlord (the AHB) must [ register your tenancy ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/registering-a-tenancy/) every year with the [ Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-disputes/residential-tenancies-board/)
  * If you have problems with your tenancy, you or your landlord (or a neighbour affected by the problems) can use the RTB’s [ dispute resolution service ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/)

Approved housing bodies came under the scope of residential tenancies
legislation on 7 April 2016, when the [ Residential Tenancies (Amendment) Act
2015 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/42/enacted/en/html) came
into effect.

##  How are my rights different to a tenant in private rented housing?

If you are a tenant of an AHB, you have most of the same rights and
responsibilities as a tenant in private rented housing, with some exceptions,
which are:

  * The [ minimum standards ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/minimum-standards-for-rented-homes/) for food preparation, storage and laundry purposes do not apply to AHBs. This means that AHBs do not have to provide you with white goods, such as washing machines. 
  * [ Rent reviews ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-increases-in-private-rented-housing/) should be carried out in accordance with your tenancy agreement (if there is one) or else no more than once a year. There is no specific notice period for a rent review, but you must be given notice as soon as is practicable. 
  * You may not assign or sublet your AHB tenancy 
  * Most AHB tenants will get [ security of tenure ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/types-of-tenancy/) after 6 months. Though, this does not apply if you are living in transitional accommodation and the tenancy is for 18 months or less. 
  * Your AHB can validly [ end your tenancy ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/if-your-landlord-wants-you-to-leave/) as long as they meet all the legal requirements. But, they cannot terminate a Part 4 tenancy because they need the property for their own or a family member's use. 

Read more about your rights in our page [ Tenants’ rights and responsibilities
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/tenants-
rights-and-obligations/) . The RTB also has [ information for tenants and
landlords ](https://www.rtb.ie/rights-and-responsibilities) .

##  Who do I contact if I have an issue?

Contact your AHB if you have a question or issue with your tenancy. There is
information on our website about what to do about [ anti-social behaviour
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-
rent-arrears-in-social-housing/) and what to do [ if your relationship with
your joint tenant ends ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/joint-
tenancy-relationship-breakdown/) .

You can contact the [ Residential Tenancies Board
](https://www.rtb.ie/contact-us) , if you have an issue with your AHB tenancy.
The RTB has a dispute resolution service to help tenants and landlords resolve
their issues. You can also contact [ Threshold ](https://threshold.ie/) , the
national housing charity, for information and advice.

###  Threshold

21 Stoneybatter  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Mon-Fri 9.30 am - 5 pm

**Tel:** 1800 454 454

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advice@threshold.ie ](mailto:advice@threshold.ie)

###  Residential Tenancies Board

PO Box 47  
Clonakilty  
Co. Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 9am to 5pm

**Tel:** 0818 303 037 or 01 702 8100

**Fax:** 0818 303 039

**Homepage:** [ http://www.rtb.ie/ ](http://www.rtb.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 14 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/your-rights-as-an-ahb-
tenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Your%20rights%20as%20an%20approved%20housing%20body%20tenant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/your-rights-as-an-ahb-
tenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/your-rights-as-an-ahb-
tenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Your%20rights%20as%20an%20approved%20housing%20body%20tenant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/your-rights-as-an-ahb-
tenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tenants’ rights and responsibilities_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/tenants-rights-and-obligations/)

The rights and responsibilities of people who rent from private landlords or
approved housing bodies.

1866.1526

  * [ _Tenants' rights to stay in rented accommodation_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/types-of-tenancy/)

Security of tenure is a tenant’s right to stay in rented accommodation for a
set amount of time.

1732.2323

  * [ _Your rights as a victim of crime_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/your-rights-as-a-victim-of-crime/)

Outlines the main rights of a person who has been the victim of a crime.

1523.2283

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

