**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for older people
](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/) > Boarding out
of older people

#  Boarding out of older people

  * What is boarding out? 
  * How does the boarding out scheme work? 
  * How much does boarding out cost? 
  * How to make a complaint about your boarding out 
  * Organisations that can help you 

##  What is boarding out?

If you are an older person and your home becomes unsuitable, or you are unable
or do not want to live on your own, you may consider moving into a private
homeowner's house.

This is called boarding out and is organised in communities by the [ Health
Service Executive ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) (HSE).

The householder is the person who owns the home. They will be responsible for
giving you the care you need as well as meals that are nutritious and varied.

The boarding out scheme is not available in all areas. A maximum of 6 people
can be boarded out in one house.

##  How does the boarding out scheme work?

Taking into account your needs, the HSE must check that the house is suitable
for you to live in.

The HSE will also check that the householder:

  * Is a suitable person to look after you 
  * Can give you suitable and sufficient care, nutritious and varied food, and be available and in attendance 
  * Respects your privacy 

You can [ read the standards of accommodation, cleanliness and safety
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1993/si/225/made/en/print) .

##  How much does boarding out cost?

You may need to pay an amount agreed by the HSE and the householder. The HSE
will also pay the householder up to half the weekly rate of the [ State
Pension (Non-Contributory). ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-
contributory/)

##  How to make a complaint about your boarding out

If you are boarding out you or somebody acting on your behalf can make a
complaint to the [ Local Health Office
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) .

You can complain about the home you are staying in, the maintenance (or
upkeep), the care you are getting and your welfare.

You can [ read about how to make a complaint about your boarding out.
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1993/si/225/made/en/print)

##  Organisations that can help you

###  Alone

1 Willie Bermingham Place  
Kilmainham  
Dublin 8  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6791032

**Homepage:** [ http://www.alone.ie/ ](http://www.alone.ie/)

**Email:** [ alone@iol.ie ](mailto:alone@iol.ie)

###  Age Action Ireland Ltd.

30-31 Lower Camden Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 4756989

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 4756011

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ageaction.ie ](http://www.ageaction.ie)

**Email:** [ info@ageaction.ie ](mailto:info@ageaction.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Boarding%20out%20of%20older%20people&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Boarding%20out%20of%20older%20people&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of residential care for older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-people/)

National quality standards are enforced in both public and private nursing
homes by HIQA, the Health Information and Quality Authority. Inspection
reports are available from them.

1599.3881

  * [ _Housing Aid for Older People Grant_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/)

Grants are available to improve the homes of older people so that they can
stay in their own homes for as long as possible.

1517.5126

  * [ _Income supports for older people_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/income-supports-for-older-people/)

Find out about the range of payments available, and link to a broader
checklist of entitlements for older people.

1452.2552

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

