**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Cancer services ](/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/) > Palliative care

#  Palliative care

  * What is palliative care? 
  * Types of palliative care 
  * Cost of palliative care 
  * Children's palliative care 
  * How to get a referral for palliative care 
  * Further information 

##  What is palliative care?

Palliative care helps people with a life-limiting illness to improve their
quality of life and manage symptoms. Life-limiting illness means a condition,
illness or disease that is progressive and cannot be cured.

Palliative care is available to people of all ages and at any stage of their
illness.

Palliative care includes psychological, social and spiritual support for the
patient and their family or carers, and includes support in bereavement.

You may be referred to palliative care services if you have been diagnosed
with a life-limiting condition such as cancer, heart failure or motor neuron
disease. The Health Service Executive (HSE) is responsible for providing
palliative care services.

##  Types of palliative care

There are different types of palliative care available, depending on your
needs.

You may be given palliative care in:

  * Your own home, by home-care nurses working with your family doctor and a specialist palliative care team if needed 
  * A hospice, which is a specialist palliative care unit 
  * A general hospital by a specialist palliative care team 
  * A community hospital or nursing home, by home-care nurses working with your family doctor and specialist palliative care teams if needed 

Access to palliative care is decided by the HSE on the basis of need. The
availability of palliative care varies across the different counties in
Ireland.

You can find palliative care services available in each county on the [ Irish
Association for Palliative Care services directory
](http://www.iapc.ie/directory/) .

###  Hospice care

A hospice is a unit where the main activity is providing specialist palliative
care. Other services are developed around these units such as in-patient care,
day care, community palliative care, out-patient care and bereavement
services.

You may be referred for specialist palliative care in a hospice if you have a
progressive, life-limiting condition and your needs become, or are expected to
become, more difficult to manage (see ‘How to get a referral for palliative
care’ below).

There are 13 hospice units in Ireland. They are located in:

  * Cork 
  * Donegal 
  * Dublin (4 hospice units) 
  * Galway 
  * Kerry 
  * Kildare 
  * Limerick 
  * Mayo 
  * Sligo 
  * Wicklow 

##  Cost of palliative care

Palliative care is free for all patients and their families. You do not need a
medical card. If you have private medical insurance, your insurer may be asked
to contribute towards the cost of your care.

##  Children's palliative care

Palliative care for children is delivered differently from the palliative care
services for adults.

Palliative care for children is usually provided at home. In the home, the
family is supported by their family doctor, public health nurse and the
specialist palliative care team (where available).

In hospitals, paediatric-trained staff provide medical and nursing care, with
support from the specialist palliative care service.

There is more information on palliative care for children on [ The Palliative
Hub for Children and Young People ](http://www.childrenspalliativehub.com/) .

##  How to get a referral for palliative care

Referral to palliative care can be organised as soon as a diagnosis is made.
You can be referred for palliative care services through any of the following:

  * Your family doctor 
  * Your hospital doctor in consultation with your family doctor 
  * The hospital’s specialist palliative care team in consultation with your family doctor 

You can talk to any of the above about getting a referral to palliative care
services.

##  Further information

The HSE has responsibility for providing palliative care services. Contact
your [ Local Health Office ](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO) .

The Irish Association for Palliative Care provides a [ services directory
](http://www.iapc.ie/directory/) which includes palliative care services in
each county.

[ The Palliative Hub ](http://www.thepalliativehub.com/) provides information
and resources on palliative care on the island of Ireland.

You can read about [ Advance Healthcare Directives ](/en/health/legal-matters-
and-health/advance-care-directives/) .

You can also get support from:

###  Irish Hospice Foundation

4th Floor  
Morrison Chambers  
32 Nassau Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 679 3188

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6730040

**Homepage:** [ http://hospicefoundation.ie ](http://hospicefoundation.ie)

**Email:** [ info@hospicefoundation.ie ](mailto:info@hospicefoundation.ie)

###  Irish Cancer Society

43-45 Northumberland Road  
Dublin 4  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 2310 500

**Locall:** Freephone Cancer Nurseline 1800 200 700

**Fax:** (01) 2310 555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cancer.ie/ ](http://www.cancer.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@irishcancer.ie ](mailto:info@irishcancer.ie)

_**Page edited:** 12 May 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/palliative-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Palliative%20care&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/palliative-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/palliative-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Palliative%20care&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/palliative-care/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland to care for a family member_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-to-care-for-a-family-member/)

This page includes information on returning to Ireland to care for a family
member.

1076.1624

  * [ _Registration of health and social care professionals_ ](/en/health/health-system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/)

Health and social care professionals are regulated by CORU. There is a process
for making complaints about the fitness to practice of registered
professionals.

1014.3015

  * [ _Unpaid leave for medical care_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/)

Unpaid leave for medical care gives you 5 days unpaid leave from work to deal
with serious medical care for a child or other relevant person.

991.7472

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

