**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ GP and hospital services
](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/) > GPs and private
patients

#  GPs and private patients

  * Introduction 
  * What services are provided by GPs in Ireland? 
  * How do I find a GP in Ireland? 
  * How much does it cost to visit the GP? 
  * How do I make a complaint about a GP service? 

##  Introduction

In Ireland, family doctors are called GPs (general practitioners). A GP is
usually the first doctor that you will see about non-emergency illnesses and
health issues.

Some GPs provide services only to private patients. You usually have to pay to
see a GP as a private patient and fees can vary.

You can see a GP free of charge if you are entitled to a [ medical card or a
GP visit card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical_cards_and_gp_visit_cards/)
.

If you need to see a GP in the evening or at the weekend, you can contact your
local [ GP Out of Hours service ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-
services/gp-out-of-hours-service/) .

This document outlines the services GPs (general practitioners) offer in
Ireland, how to find a GP and how much it costs to visit a GP in Ireland. It
also covers visiting a GP out of hours and how to make a complaint about a GP.

###  GP services and COVID-19

If you think you might have COVID-19, you should phone your GP. Do not go to
the GP clinic. If you do not have a GP, [ you can find a GP in your area
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/find-a-gp/) .

Your GP will carry out an assessment over the phone. If your doctor thinks you
need a COVID-19 test, they will arrange the test for you. The GP assessment
and test are free of charge. Read more about [ Testing and COVID-19
](/en/health/covid19/testing-for-covid19/) .

##  What services are provided by GPs in Ireland?

GPs provide a broad service on all health issues and may refer you to see a
specialist or hospital consultant if your condition needs further
investigation. You cannot see a consultant for the first time without a
referral from a GP.

As well as health consultations, GPs may also provide:

  * Prescriptions for medicine 
  * Immunisation and vaccination services 
  * Maternity care 
  * Family planning services. 

The range of services on offer can vary between GPs. Contact the GP before
your visit to make sure they have the service you need.

GPs may also now provide abortion services in Ireland. You read more
information about [ unplanned pregnancy ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-pregnancy/) and find information on
abortion services in Ireland on our website and from HSE [ myoptions.ie
](http://www.myoptions.ie/) .

##  How do I find a GP in Ireland?

You can find out which GPs are available in your local area using the [ HSE’s
Health Atlas ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/maps/) .

Sometimes GP practices have a full list of patients and cannot take on new
patients. In this case, you should go to another GP practice in your area. You
can transfer to the GP of your first choice at a later date if they start
taking on new patients again.

You do not need a [ Personal Public Service (PPS) number
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/personal-public-service-number/) or other documentation to visit a GP.

##  How much does it cost to visit the GP?

GPs are usually part of the private healthcare system and so you will usually
need to pay charges when you see one. However, adults over 70 and children
under 8 are entitled to a [ GP visit card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-
visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) , which allows them to visit a GP free of charge.

There are no set fees or charges for GP services. To visit a GP, you can
expect to pay from around 45 euro up to 65 euro (in some urban areas). Contact
your GP before your first visit to find out about charges.

GPs may provide certain services to private patients free of charge. For
example, they might provide [ maternity and infant care services
](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-
services/) and immunisation and vaccination services, if they have agreements
with the HSE.

In the case of some vaccination services (for example, the [ flu vaccine
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/flu-vaccination/about-
the-vaccine/) for at-risk groups), if you are a private patient, the vaccine
is free of charge but you must pay for the GP’s service.

##  How do I make a complaint about a GP service?

The Medical Council protects the interests of the public with regard to
registered medical practitioners and [ handles complaints about a medical
doctor's fitness to practise medicine ](https://www.medicalcouncil.ie/Public-
Information/Making-a-Complaint-/) .

_**Page edited:** 19 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/gps-and-private-
patients/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=GPs%20and%20private%20patients&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/gps-and-private-
patients/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/gps-and-private-
patients/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=GPs%20and%20private%20patients&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/gps-and-private-
patients/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Services for medical card and GP visit card holders_ ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/gp-services-to-medical-card-holders/)

Family doctors (GPs) provide certain services to medical card and GP visit
card holders free of charge.

2070.2622

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and buying private health insurance_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-and-buying-private-health-insurance/)

Outlines things you should consider when buying private health insurance as a
returning Irish emigrant. Covers waiting periods, pre-existing conditions,
age-related loading and maternity related claims.

1872.1764

  * [ _GP out-of-hours service_ ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/gp-out-of-hours-service/)

How the GP out-of-hours service in Ireland works, how much the GP out-of-hours
service costs and how to contact your local GP out-of-hours service.

1695.2323

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

