**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Local
authority and social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/) > Joint tenancy and relationship breakdown

#  Joint tenancy and relationship breakdown

  * What is a joint tenancy in a local authority home? 
  * What happens if the relationship with my joint tenant ends? 
  * Who do I contact? 

##  What is a joint tenancy in a local authority home?

A joint tenancy is usually created when a local authority or approved housing
body (AHB) allocates a home to a couple. This means that you and your partner
both sign the tenancy agreement with the local authority or AHB. The local
authority can also create a joint tenancy where the tenants arenâ€™t partners,
in certain circumstances.

##  What happens if the relationship with my joint tenant ends?

If you have a joint tenancy for a local authority home and the relationship
with your joint tenant ends and they leave the home, you will want to remove
their name from the tenancy agreement.

If your joint tenant agrees to have their name removed, the local authority or
AHB will do this. However, if your joint tenant refuses to have their name
removed, you may have to provide evidence that the relationship has broken
down.

In a [ judicial separation, divorce or dissolution ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/factors-in-separation-divorce/) the court
will consider who has the right to live in the [ family or shared home
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-
home/) . In these cases, if your joint tenant does not voluntarily give up the
tenancy, the judge can order a transfer of tenancy. If you are a joint tenant
and your relationship is breaking down, you should get legal advice.

If you are left living alone in the family home, the local authority or AHB
may decide that your home is too big for you and offer you alternative
accommodation. If you have occasional custody of your children and need
somewhere for them to stay, the local authority may agree to let you stay in
your home.

There is no specific legislation to cover what happens when you have a joint
tenancy and your relationship ends. They are dealt with in the tenancy
agreement you have with your local authority or AHB. These situations are
often handled on a case-by-case basis and may be dealt with differently by
different local authorities.

##  Who do I contact?

Contact the Housing Department of [ your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) or [ approved
housing body ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/approved-
housing-bodies/) .

_**Page edited:** 16 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/joint-tenancy-relationship-
breakdown/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Joint%20tenancy%20and%20relationship%20breakdown&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/joint-tenancy-relationship-
breakdown/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/joint-tenancy-relationship-
breakdown/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Joint%20tenancy%20and%20relationship%20breakdown&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/joint-tenancy-relationship-
breakdown/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Access to children after relationship breakdown_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/access-to-children-cohabiting-couples/)

How to apply for access to children for separating unmarried parents.

1519.8418

  * [ _Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)

This page explains whether spouses and cohabiting partners have any property
rights following the breakdown of their relationship.

1435.5641

  * [ _Breakdown of a marriage or other relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/breakdown-of-a-marriage-or-relationship/)

The breakdown of a marriage or other relationship is a difficult and traumatic
process. This page outlines the issues that may arise.

1399.2156

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

