**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Medical cards
and GP visit cards ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/) > Over 70s
means test for medical cards

#  Over 70s means test for medical cards

  * Introduction 
  * What income is assessed? 
  * Income over the basic rates for over 70s 
  * Savings and investments assessment 
  * Is property assessed for the over 70s medical card? 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

If you are aged over 70, you automatically qualify for a [ GP visit card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/gp-visit-cards/) . You can get a [ medical card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) instead if your weekly income is below a certain amount.
Your income, savings and investments are reviewed by the HSE in the means
test. However, there are certain exceptions.

Check if you automatically qualify for a medical card, as some [ people are
exempt from the means test.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/#552e17)

If you are [ aged under 70
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card-means-test-under-70s/) , there is a different means test
for a medical card.

##  Medical card basic rates for over 70s

The weekly basic rate of income for a single person over the age of 70 is:

  * €550 for a single person 
  * €1,050 for couples who are married, cohabiting or in a civil partnership 

Your weekly income is your gross income (your income before tax, PRSI and
Universal Social Charge (USC) have been deducted).

If your only income comes from social welfare or HSE payments, you should get
a [ medical card ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-
and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) even if your income is above the means test
rate for your age group.

###  **Medical card basic rates for couples**

The assessment of a couple is based on the age of the older person.

**Your spouse or partner is aged under 70 years:** Where only one of you is
aged over 70 years, you will both qualify for a medical card if your combined
income is not over €1,050 a week.

**Surviving spouse or partner:** If your spouse, civil partner or cohabiting
partner dies and you are aged over 70, you can keep your medical card for 3
years, provided that your income remains less than the limit for a couple.
After 3 years, the relevant income limit for a single person applies.

If you are aged under 70 when your spouse, civil partner or cohabiting partner
dies, [ the relevant income limit for a single person
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card-means-test-under-70s/) applies.

##  What income is assessed?

The HSE reviews your gross weekly income from:

  * Pensions 
  * Earnings 
  * Interest from savings and investments 
  * All other sources of income 

Your gross income is your income before tax, PRSI and Universal Social Charge
(USC) have been deducted.

###  **Income not assessed**

If you are over 70, the HSE will not assess income from:

  * [ Fuel Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
  * [ Telephone Support Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/telephone-support-allowance/)
  * [ Living Alone Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/)
  * Additional property if generating no rental income 
  * [ Household Benefits awarded by the Department of Social Protection ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/) , for example, electricity or gas allowance and television licence) 

####  **Rent-a-room scheme exclusion**

If you rent a room in your home under the [ rent-a-room scheme
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/) , you
can have this rental income disregarded in the means test for a medical card
or GP visit card.

You must rent the room to a private tenant and your rental income must not be
more than €14,000 per year.

##  Income over the basic rates for over 70s

If your income is above the HSE basic rate for over 70s you:

  * Will get a [ GP visit card ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) for over 70s 
  * Can still apply for the [ Drugs Payment Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/drugs-payment-scheme/)
  * May be assessed under the basic rates for people under 70 

If your income is reviewed under the [ means test for people under 70
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-
under-70s/) , certain income is not assessed and some allowable expenses (such
as rent or mortgage costs and nursing home fees) will be taken into account.

###  **Discretionary medical card**

If your finances are still above the qualifying limits for a [ medical card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , the HSE can look at your social and medical situation.
They will decide if you would have trouble paying for medical care for you and
your family and may give you a [ discretionary medical card
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/schemes-allowances/medical-cards/other-types-
of-medical-card/discretionary-medical-cards/) . For example, they will
consider if you would have difficulty meeting significant ongoing medical
expenses without a medical card.

**If you still do not qualify for a medical card, you:**

  * Will get a [ GP visit card ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) for over 70s 
  * Can still apply for the [ Drugs Payment Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/drugs-payment-scheme/)

##  Savings and investments assessment

Your savings and investments are also reviewed by the HSE in the means test
for a [ medical card ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) .

Savings and investments of up to €36,000 for a single person, and up to
€72,000 for a couple, are disregarded.

Interest on savings or investments over the limit is taken into account in the
means test.

This means that only the interest or income earned on your savings and
investments will be counted as income, not the total value of the savings or
investments themselves.

###  **How does the HSE assess interest?**

There are different ways the HSE can assess your savings and investments. They
can use:

  * A Certificate of Interest (usually from your bank) of all your savings, or 
  * Copies of bank statements showing the current balance on your account or account 

If you have stocks or shares, you will need to provide a copy of your current
Share Certificates showing shareholdings.

The HSE can calculate your weekly income from savings and investments using
the following rules:

**Capital** |  **Weekly means assessed**  
---|---  
First €36,000 (single), €72,000 (couple)  |  Nil   
Next €10,000  |  €1 per €1,000   
Next €10,000  |  €2 per €1,000   
More than €56,000 (single) or €92,000 (couple)  |  €4 per €1,000   
  
For example, if you are a couple and have €90,000 in savings, any income on
the first €72,000 will not be considered. The income on the next €10,000 will
be considered at €1 per €1,000 totalling €10. The balance of €8,000 will be
considered at €2 per €1,000 totalling €16.

Check what [ documents you may need for the HSE to assess your income from
savings and investment ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/schemes-
allowances/medical-cards/applying/documents-you-need/) [ .
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/schemes-allowances/medical-
cards/applying/documents-you-need/)

##  Is property assessed for the over 70s medical card?

If you are over 70, the value of your properties are not assessed by the HSE.
This could be a family home, a holiday home or any other property.

###  **Property that you rent out**

If you have property that you rent out, the rental income is assessed by the
HSE. Rental income can include income from renting a room in your family home,
a holiday home, leased land or any other property.

Rental income is assessed after deducting mortgage payments and insurance
premiums.

**Accommodation Recognition Payment**

The [ Accommodation Recognition Payment for hosting international protection
applicants from Ukraine ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-
ireland/accommodation-recognition-payment/) is not assessed as rental income
for a medical card.

####  **Rent-a-room scheme exclusion**

If you rent a room in your home under the [ rent-a-room scheme
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/) , you
can have this rental income disregarded in the means test for a medical card
or GP visit card.

You must rent the room to a private tenant and your rental income must not be
more than €14,000 per year.

###  **Property that is not rented**

**If you are** **aged over 70,** income will not be assessed from your
property that is not generating a rental income.

**If you are** [ **aged under 70** ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card-means-test-over-70s/) and have unused land or buildings
that you are not renting, but could be leased or sold, the HSE reviews the
value of the property as a savings and investment assessment (above).

##  More information

Read [ more information about the medical card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , including how to apply. Find a copy of the [
application form for a medical card for over 70s
](https://assets.hse.ie/media/documents/Medical_Card_and_GP_Visit_Card_Application_Form_-
_People_Aged_70_Years_or_Older.pdf) .

You can read more information about [ medical cards
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) and [ GP visit cards
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/gp-visit-cards/) , including how to apply. If you are under 70, check if
you are eligible under the [ means test for people aged under 70.
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-
under-70s/)

You can also read about [ prescription charges for medical card holders
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-and-
medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-holders/) .

Find more information on the [ medical card
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/schemes-allowances/medical-cards/) and [ GP
visit card ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/schemes-allowances/gp-visit-cards/)
on the HSE website. You can also find more detail in the [ HSE Assessment
Guidelines for medical cards and GP visit cards
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/pcrs/medical-card-and-gp-visit-card-assessment-
guidelines.pdf) .

The HSE has information on [ financial assessment.
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/medical-cards/medical-card-application-
process/the-medical-card-assessment.html)

_**Page edited:** 27 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-
over-70s/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Over%2070s%20means%20test%20for%20medical%20cards&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-
over-70s/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-
over-70s/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Over%2070s%20means%20test%20for%20medical%20cards&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-
cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-
over-70s/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Under 70s means test for medical card and GP visit card_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-under-70s/)

How your income is assessed for the medical card and GP visit card if you are
under 70 years of age.

2073.0671

  * [ _Cash income not included in the means test_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-test/)

This page lists the income from cash not included in the means test for social
welfare payments.

1668.3446

  * [ _Emergency medical cards_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/emergency-medical-card/)

In certain emergency situations, a healthcare professional can apply for you
to get a medical card known as an emergency medical card.

1528.2767

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

