**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for older people
](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/) > Tax relief
on nursing home fees and for dependent relatives

#  Tax relief on nursing home fees and for dependent relatives

  * Introduction 

##  Introduction

Income tax relief is available on fees paid for nursing homes.

There also are a number of other tax reliefs for carers and people with
disabilities.

###  Tax relief on nursing home fees

You claim tax relief for nursing home fees under the general scheme for tax
relief on medical expenses.

You can claim this relief at your highest rate of [ income tax
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money_and_tax/tax/income_tax/) if the
nursing home provides 24-hour on-site nursing care.

If you are paying the charges for a nursing home you can claim the tax relief
whether you are in the nursing home yourself or you are paying for another
person to be there.

For further information, including how to apply, see [ taxation and medical
expenses ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-
medical-expenses/) .

###  Other tax reliefs

You can claim [ tax relief on the cost of employing a carer ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-for-
employing-a-home-carer/) for yourself or for another family member.

If you are caring for a dependent relative you may qualify for the [ Dependent
Relative Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-
people-with-disabilities/dependent-relative-tax-credit/) .

A deed of covenant is a legally binding agreement that is written down and
agreed between two people stating that one agrees to pay money to the other
without getting any benefit in return. [ Tax relief on a Deed of Covenant
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/deeds-of-covenant/) is
available if it is made to a permanently incapacitated minor, permanently
incapacitated adult, or person over 65 years of age.

There are also a number of other [ tax reliefs for people with disabilities
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money_and_tax/tax/tax_credits_and_reliefs_for_people_with_disabilities/)
.

_**Page edited:** 8 December 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-
for-dependent-relatives/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20relief%20on%20nursing%20home%20fees%20and%20for%20dependent%20relatives&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-
for-dependent-relatives/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-
for-dependent-relatives/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20relief%20on%20nursing%20home%20fees%20and%20for%20dependent%20relatives&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-
for-dependent-relatives/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax relief for third-level fees_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)

Tax relief is available in respect of tuition fees paid in private third-level
institutions, in institutions abroad and by repeat students and part-time
students. The Student Contribution may also qualify for relief.

3127.7197

  * [ _Tax credits and reliefs for people over 65_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

There are some tax reliefs specifically for people aged over 65. This page
also gives an overview of other tax reliefs that may be relevant.

2899.2297

  * [ _Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

2889.5952

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

