**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) > [ Grants for
home renovations and improvements ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/) > Grants for solar
panels

#  Grants for solar panels

  * Introduction 
  * What are solar panels? 
  * Do I qualify for the Solar Electricity Grant? 
  * What to consider before applying for the Solar Electricity Grant 
  * How much is the grant? 
  * How to apply for the Solar Electricity Grant 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Solar Electricity Grant provides a grant to help with the cost of buying
and installing solar photovoltaic (PV) panels for your home. The grant is
administered by the [ Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI)
](https://www.seai.ie/) .

You must apply for the grant and get a grant offer from the SEAI before you
get your solar panels and start any work.

###  Solar panel grants for businesses

You can also get SEAI [ grants for solar PV ](https://www.seai.ie/business-
and-public-sector/business-grants-and-supports/commercial-solar-pv/) for your
business or a non-domestic building. This includes public buildings, sports
clubs and community organisations.

For more on these grants, see ' [ Supports for businesses going green
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/supports-for-businesses-
going-green/) ' or visit [ SEAI.ie ](https://www.seai.ie/) .

##  What are solar panels?

Solar panels are devices that use sunlight to generate hot water, or
electricity to power electrical devices in your home.

  * Solar panels that produce electricity are known as solar photovoltaic (PV) modules. These panels generate electricity when exposed to light. Solar PV is the rooftop solar you see on homes and businesses. 
  * [ Solar panels that produce hot water ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/solar-water-heating-grant/) are known as solar thermal collectors or solar hot water collectors. 

This Solar Electricity Grant focuses on PV, where solar electric panels
capture the light from the sun and convert it into the electricity that is
used in your home to power your TV, kettle, toaster and so on. These panels
are often mounted on the roof of your house or in the garden.

Most homes need six or seven solar panels, which is a 2 kilowatt system. It is
important that the system is sized for self-consumption of the energy within
the home as per the [ Code of Practice (pdf)
](https://www.seai.ie/publications/SPV-Code-of-Practice.pdf) .

##  Do I qualify for the Solar Electricity Grant?

To qualify for a grant, you must:

  * Be the owner of a home built and occupied before 2021 
  * Use new materials and products that were not already covered by another grant scheme 
  * Use a registered company from the [ SEAI’s registered list of companies ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/find-a-registered-professional/solar-pv-companies/)
  * Have the electrical works completed by a Safe Electric Ireland electrician 
  * Apply to ESB Networks to be connected to the electricity distribution system using the [ ESB Networks NC6 form (pdf). ](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-source/publications/6-e02835310-esb-nc-form_dec_22_nc6_final-v.pdf?sfvrsn=e5b30164_18) Your registered installer should do this for you before they fit the system. 
  * Provide a Declaration of Works signed by a registered installer on the [ SEAI Solar PV Approved Installer list ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/find-a-registered-professional/solar-pv-companies/)
  * Have a [ Building Energy Rating (BER) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/) carried out after the work is completed 
  * Meet the requirements in the [ Solar PV Code of Practice ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/solar-electricity-grant/Solar-PV-Scheme-Guide.pdf)

##  What to consider before applying for the Solar Electricity Grant

There are a number of things to consider before applying for the grant. For
example, you should check if you should insulate your home first and if you’ll
need planning permission.

###  Insulating your home before getting solar panels

SEAI recommends that you insulate your home before considering solar panels,
as insulation is the easiest way to reduce your energy costs. You can apply
for the following grants with the SEAI to insulate your home and improve its
overall energy efficiency:

  * [ Better Energy Homes Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/better-energy-homes-scheme/)
  * [ Better Energy Warmer Homes Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/)
  * [ National Home Energy Upgrade Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)

Some of these schemes include the Solar Electricity Grant as one of their
energy efficiency measures. However, you may have to apply for it separately.

###  Do I need planning permission for solar panels?

You do not need [ planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-permission-for-altering-a-house/) to install solar panels
at your home as long as you meet certain conditions. However, ask your local
authority for guidance about planning permission if:

  * Your home is a protected structure 
  * You home is in a protected area, for example, an architectural conservation area 

###  Solar PV system requirements

Energy generated from your solar PV system should be used in your home, and
the system should be of a suitable size for this. See the [ Solar PV Grant
Application Guide (pdf) ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/solar-
electricity-grant/Solar-PV-Scheme-Guide.pdf) for further technical
specifications, as well as information on insurance, contracts, inspections,
grant limits and how to apply.

All systems must comply with the requirements set out in the [ Code of
Practice for Installers (pdf) ](https://www.seai.ie/publications/SPV-Code-of-
Practice.pdf) . The Declaration of Works must be completed and signed off by a
registered solar PV installer. Registered solar PV installers are listed on
seai.ie.

###  Choosing a contractor

Before choosing a company from the registered list, the SEAI recommend that
you get a number of quotes and compare the offers, and request and check the
company’s references.

You must have a contract in place with the contractor to ensure that you have
a suitable level of consumer protection. SEAI have a [ sample contract (pdf)
](https://www.seai.ie/publications/Model-Contract.pdf) on their website to
help with this.

##  How much is the grant?

The grant you get depends on the peak output of your solar system. Peak output
is measured in kWp, which is kilowatt-peak. You get:

  * €800 per kWp for up 2kWp 
  * €250 for every additional kWp up to 4kWp 

This means you will get:

  * €800 for 1kWp 
  * €1,600 for 2kWp 
  * €1,850 for 3kWp 
  * €2,100 for 4kWp 

In 2024, the grant is capped at €2,100. The Government plans to reduce the
grant by up to €300 every year, as it expects the cost of solar panel systems
to reduce over time. It is intended that the grant will end in 2029.

The grant covers materials and labour, unless you are a contractor doing the
work in your own home. In this case, only the cost of the materials is
covered.

If the cost of the systems and labour (including [ VAT ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/duties-and-vat/value-added-tax/) ) is less than the maximum grant
amount, you will get a grant for the actual cost.

**Note:** You are only eligible for the grant once.

##  How to apply for the Solar Electricity Grant

You can [ apply for the Solar PV Scheme online ](https://mgen.seai.ie/) or by
post. If applying by post, you should contact the SEAI to get an application
form and send it back to them – see ‘Where to apply’ below.

When applying for the grant, you need to provide details about the
installation, including the size of the system to be installed. You also need
to provide your address and the MPRN number from your electricity bill, the
year your house was built and the name of the registered company you intend to
use.

You must receive approval for the grant before you start installing your solar
panels. When you receive approval, you have 8 months to complete the works.
The work must be finished before you can get your grant payment and you must
have either paid your contractor or agreed a payment plan with them.

###  After the works are completed

Your installer will give you the documentation you need to claim the grant,
including the signed Declaration of Works form. You should keep these
documents for your records. Your installer will also complete and upload a
number of documents about the work to the SEAI website. SEAI has a [ solar PV
completion checklist (pdf) ](https://www.seai.ie/publications/Solar-PV-Grant-
Completion-Checklist.pdf) that lists the documents needed.

SEAI will then check if your installation meets the scheme requirements. Once
all conditions are met, SEAI will then process your payment which will be paid
by electronic funds transfer (EFT) into your bank account.

###  Homeowner records

During the upgrade works, you will get documents from the company doing the
work. You should keep these documents in a safe place so you can have them for
your BER assessor, or if you are inspected by the SEAI.

The SEAI recommends you keep all this information together in a safe place for
future reference. It may also be useful if you want to sell your house or if
there is a problem with any of the work.

##  Where to apply

###  Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland

SEAI Head Office

3 Park Place  
Upper Hatch Street  
Dublin 2

**Tel:** 01 8082100

**Homepage:** [ http://www.seai.ie/ ](http://www.seai.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@seai.ie ](mailto:info@seai.ie)

_**Page edited:** 25 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-
solar-panels/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Grants%20for%20solar%20panels&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-
solar-panels/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-
solar-panels/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Grants%20for%20solar%20panels&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-
solar-panels/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Grants for a home energy upgrade_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-a-home-energy-upgrade/)

This scheme provides grants to help to upgrade the energy efficiency of your
home to a BER rating of B2 or above.

1252.3466

  * [ _Grants and funds for mature students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-students/)

Information on grants and funds available for mature students in third-level
education.

1158.3605

  * [ _Postgraduate student grants_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-student-grant/)

If you are starting a postgraduate course, you can qualify for financial
assistance under the Student Grant Scheme.

968.90076

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

