**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Losing your
home and homelessness ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/) >
Compulsory purchase of property

#  Compulsory purchase of property

  * What is a compulsory purchase order? 
  * Can I get compensation? 
  * How long will the compulsory purchase process take? 
  * Compulsory purchase of derelict or dangerous property 
  * Useful contacts and information 

##  What is a compulsory purchase order?

Certain statutory bodies can take land or property without the owner's
consent. A compulsory purchase order (CPO) is the legal function they use to
do this.

Compulsory purchase usually happens to allow a public infrastructure project
to go ahead for the common good. CPOs are most often used for road improvement
schemes and urban development schemes, such as the [ LUAS ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/luas/) project in Dublin.

###  What should I do if I get a CPO?

The compulsory purchase system is a complex area. You should get professional
advice from a chartered surveyor if you are served with a notice about a CPO.
The fees charged by a chartered surveyor are part of a normal claim for
compensation.

You can find a chartered surveyor on the website of the [ Society of Chartered
Surveyors Ireland (SCSI) ](http://www.scsi.ie/) . The SCSI is the professional
body for chartered surveyors.

If you get a CPO, you have the right to:

  * Object to it 
  * Make representations 
  * Negotiate 
  * Refer the matter to property arbitrators 
  * Have your objections heard 

##  Can I get compensation?

If your house and land are compulsorily purchased, you can get compensation.
The level of compensation should:

  * Leave you in the same position financially as you were before the compulsory purchase, or as close as possible to this 
  * Be based on the market value of your property 
  * Reflect the value of the land that is purchased and any reduction in the value of any land you keep that came about because of the CPO 

The Society of Chartered Surveyors has a [ client guide to CPOs and
compensation. ](https://scsi.ie/a-clear-guide-to-compulsory-purchase-orders-
and-compensation/)

##  How long will the compulsory purchase process take?

The CPO process can take about 18 months. But, it can be shorter or longer
than this. There are a number of factors which can affect this timeframe,
including:

  * The size of the CPO 
  * If there are objections 
  * If there is an oral hearing 
  * If there is a judicial review 

##  Compulsory purchase of derelict or dangerous property

Local authorities are responsible for dealing with [ derelict sites
](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/derelict-sites/) , [ dangerous
places and dangerous structures ](/en/environment/buildings-and-
structures/dangerous-structures/) in their areas.

A local authority can buy dangerous land and derelict sites in its area by
either:

  * Agreeing this with the owner 
  * Compulsory purchase 

This includes land that is no longer dangerous because the local authority has
carried out work on it.

###  What is the process for purchasing these sites?

The local authority must advertise the details of any proposed compulsory
purchase in the local newspaper. They must also send a notice to the owner or
occupier of the land, giving them information about how and where to object to
the proposed purchase.

For dangerous places, a notice must also be posted on or near the land, giving
details of the local authority's intentions to compulsory purchase the place.

If someone makes an objection, the local authority cannot buy the land without
the consent of [ An Bord Pleanála ](/en/housing/planning-permission/an-bord-
pleanala/) .

If An Bord Pleanála approves the compulsory purchase and the local authority
has dealt with any objections, the local authority can buy the land, using a [
vesting order ](https://www.tailte.ie/registration/guidance-and-legal-
practices/legal-practices/practice-directions/local-authority-vesting-orders/)
.

##  Useful contacts and information

###  The Society of Chartered Surveyers

5 Wilton Place  
Dublin  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6765500

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6761412

**Homepage:** [ http://www.scs.ie ](http://www.scs.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/compulsory-purchase-of-
property/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Compulsory%20purchase%20of%20property&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/compulsory-purchase-of-
property/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/compulsory-purchase-of-
property/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Compulsory%20purchase%20of%20property&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/compulsory-purchase-of-
property/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Deferring payment of the Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-tax/)

The Local Property Tax is a tax payable on residential property. This document
gives information about who qualifies for deferral and how to defer payment of
the tax.

949.0204

  * [ _Property rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

This page explains the property rights of cohabiting couples, for example, in
relation to buying a home together, making a cohabitation agreement, applying
for local authority housing, and getting legal advice.

911.72314

  * [ _Local Authority Purchase and Renovation Loan_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/local-authority-purchase-and-renovation-loan/)

Government-backed mortgage and loan that helps you to buy and renovate a
derelict or uninhabitable home.

858.35486

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

