**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) > [ Local
authority housing grants and supports ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/) > Local authority home
improvement loans

#  Local authority home improvement loans

  * What are local authority home improvement loans? 
  * Do I qualify? 
  * How much can I borrow? 
  * How long do I have to repay the loan? 
  * How to apply 

##  What are local authority home improvement loans?

You may be able to get a local authority home improvement loan if you want to
improve, repair or extend your home and can't get a loan from a bank or
building society. You must own and live in the home to qualify for the loan.
These loans are only available from some local authorities, so you should
contact your [ local authority ](https://www.housing.gov.ie/local-
government/administration/local-authorities/local-authorities) to check if the
scheme operates in your area.

##  Do I qualify?

To qualify for a local authority home improvement loan you must show the local
authority that you cannot get a loan from a bank or building society. You must
also meet one of the following criteria:

  * Your house needs to be improved, repaired or extended because it is overcrowded and your income satisfies the income test below 
  * You are registered on a housing waiting list with a local authority 
  * You are a local authority tenant or a tenant purchaser and you want to buy a private house and return your present house to the local authority 
  * You are a tenant for more than one year of a home provided by an [ approved housing body ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) (AHB) and you want to buy a private house and return your present house to the AHB 

###  Income test

You only need to satisfy this income test if you need the loan to improve your
home because it is overcrowded and you are not covered by one of the other
criteria above.

You qualify if:

  * You are a single-income household and your gross income before tax in the last income tax year was €40,000 or less 
  * You are a two-income household and your income is €100,000 or less after this calculation. Multiply the gross income (before tax) of the higher earner in the last income tax year by 2.5 and add the gross income of the other earner in the last income tax year. 

##  How much can I borrow?

The maximum improvement loans are:

  * €38,000 if the loan is secured by a mortgage on the house (or €50,000 if the home is on an offshore island) 
  * €15,000 if the loan is not secured by a mortgage on the house 

A variable interest rate applies on these loans.

##  How long do I have to repay the loan?

You must repay the loan within 15 years of getting the payment.

##  How to apply

Contact your [ local authority ](https://www.housing.gov.ie/local-
government/administration/local-authorities/local-authorities) to check if
this scheme is available in your area and to find out how it works there.

_**Page edited:** 19 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/local-
authority-home-improvement-loans/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Local%20authority%20home%20improvement%20loans&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/local-
authority-home-improvement-loans/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/local-
authority-home-improvement-loans/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Local%20authority%20home%20improvement%20loans&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/local-
authority-home-improvement-loans/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Improvement Works in Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/improvement-works-in-lieu-of-local-authority-housing/)

Local authorities may improve or extend privately owned houses as an
alternative to providing local authority housing.

2426.0942

  * [ _Buying or inheriting a local authority home_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/buying-or-inheriting-a-local-authority-home/)

Schemes for local authority tenants to buy their homes at a discount as well
ways in which you might inherit one..

1972.4603

  * [ _Transferring to another local authority home_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/getting-a-transfer-to-another-local-authority-home/)

Local authorities operate transfer lists for people who want to move to
another local authority home. Private transfers can be arranged with the local
authorities' permission.

1913.3827

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

