**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > Owning your home

#  Owning your home

  * [ Management companies for apartment blocks ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/management-companies-for-apartment-blocks/)

An owners' management company must be set up before the developer of an
apartment block sells any units.

  * [ Rent a room tax relief scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/)

Rent-a-room relief makes it possible to earn tax-free rental income when you
rent out a room in your home to private tenants.

  * [ Ground rent on property ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/ground-rent/)

Ground rent is paid on properties that are owned by leasehold. You can buy out
the ground rent, so you then own the property outright.

  * [ Switching your mortgage ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/switching-your-mortgage/)

This page includes information on switching your mortgage to a new lender,
including how to switch your mortgage, what happens after you switch and what
to do if something goes wrong when switching.

  * [ Rights of way ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/)

A right of way allows you to travel over land that belongs to someone else.
This page describes public and private rights of way, as well as how to
establish and register a right of way.

  * [ Renting your property for short-term lets ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-your-property-for-shortterm-lets/)

Information about the tax implications and planning rules if you are renting
your property or a room in your property to visitors for short-term lets.

  * [ Getting a Building Energy Rating for your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/)

An outline of how and why to get a Building Energy Rating (BER) for your home.

  * [ Renting out a room in your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/)

If you rent out a room in your home, you have certain rights and
responsibilities. These are different depending on your home and the type of
accommodation you are renting.

  * [ Boundary disputes between neighbours ](/en/justice/neighbour-disputes/boundary-disputes/)

The general rule is that any boundaries between your land and your neighbourâ€™s
land are jointly owned by both you and your neighbour. But you may be able to
prove that you own a boundary structure outright.

**This document is in:** [ Neighbour disputes ](/en/justice/neighbour-
disputes/)

  * [ Family and shared homes ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-and-shared-home/)

What is the difference between a family home and a shared home? Can my partner
sell our home if we break up?

**This document is in:** [ Separation, divorce and dissolution ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/)

  * [ Property rights of cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/property-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

This page explains the property rights of cohabiting couples, for example, in
relation to buying a home together, making a cohabitation agreement, applying
for local authority housing, and getting legal advice.

**This document is in:** [ Cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/)

  * [ Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)

This page explains whether spouses and cohabiting partners have any property
rights following the breakdown of their relationship.

**This document is in:** [ Problems in marriages and other relationships
](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-
relationships/)

  * [ Accommodation Recognition Payment for hosting refugees from Ukraine ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-payment/)

The Accommodation Recognition Payment is a monthly payment for people
providing accommodation to people fleeing the conflict in Ukraine.

**This document is in:** [ Ukrainian refugees in Ireland ](/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/)

  * [ Asbestos ](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/asbestos-regulations/)

Asbestos can release dangerous dust if it is disturbed. It should only be
dealt with by specialists, using protective equipment and strict safeguards.

**This document is in:** [ Health and safety in your environment
](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/)

  * [ Radon gas in buildings ](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/radon-in-buildings/)

Prolonged exposure to radon gas can lead to lung cancer. The Environmental
Protection Agency gives information on how to reduce dangerous levels of radon
in your home.

**This document is in:** [ Health and safety in your environment
](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/)

  * [ Water supply ](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/water-supply/)

The various ways that water is supplied to homes and businesses.

**This document is in:** [ Drinking water and water supply
](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/)

  * [ Septic tanks and other domestic waste water treatment systems ](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/domestic-wastewater-treatment/)

Registration and inspection of septic tanks and other domestic waste water
treatment systems

**This document is in:** [ Drinking water and water supply
](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/)

###  Most Read in "Owning your home"

  1. [ Rent a room tax relief scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/)
  2. [ Renting out a room in your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/)
  3. [ Getting a Building Energy Rating for your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/)
  4. [ Renting your property for short-term lets ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-your-property-for-shortterm-lets/)
  5. [ Rights of way ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/)

