**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Vacant homes
](/en/housing/vacant-homes/) > Vacant homes

#  Vacant homes

  * What is a vacant home? 
  * What do I do if I see a vacant home? 
  * What can happen if a home is left vacant? 
  * What schemes are available for fixing a vacant home? 
  * More information 

##  What is a vacant home?

A vacant home is a home which does not have anyone living in it. For example,
a vacant home could be a:

  * Rental property that is not being rented 
  * Property that is for sale and is vacant 
  * Property where the owner has died and the home is in probate 
  * Property that is being refurbished 

As well as contributing to homelessness, vacant properties can have a negative
impact on communities and their surrounding areas. They can lead to:

  * Neighbourhood decline 
  * Deterioration and dereliction 
  * Vandalism 
  * Social and environmental problems 

As part of the Government’s [ Housing for All plan
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ef5ec-housing-for-all-a-new-housing-plan-
for-ireland/) , they aim to reduce the number of vacant homes to increase
housing supply in Ireland and help reduce homelessness.

This is outlined in detail in Pathway 4 of the Housing for All plan, [
Addressing Vacancy and Efficient Use of Existing Stock (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/197161/c8410c74-95ce-40fb-
aba7-90643385be87.pdf#page=null) .

##  What do I do if I see a vacant home?

If you notice a vacant home in your area, you can report it to your local
authority using the online form on [ vacanthomes.ie ](https://vacanthomes.ie/)
.

The local authority will investigate and, if appropriate, work to bring the
vacant home back into use.

##  What can happen if a home is left vacant?

The Government tries to reduce the number of vacant properties by:

  * Taxing vacant properties 
  * Buying derelict sites by compulsory purchase 
  * Providing grants to help people renovate and refurbish vacant homes 

You can find out more about how the Government aim to tackle vacant houses in
the Housing for All plan.

###  **Tax on vacant properties**

A [ Vacant Homes Tax (VHT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-
reliefs/vacant-homes-tax/) was introduced in 2023. It applies to properties
which can be lived in but have been stayed in for less than 30 days in the
previous 12 months.

The rate of VHT on a property is three times the [ basic rate of Local
Property Tax ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/vacant-homes-
tax/local_property_tax.en.html#l20ad0) for the property.

The basic rate of Local Property Tax depends on the value of the property.

See our page on the [ Vacant Homes Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-
and-reliefs/vacant-homes-tax/) for more information.

###  **Compulsory purchase of vacant and derelict sites**

Some statutory bodies can take land or property without the owner's consent. A
compulsory purchase order (CPO) is the legal function they use to do this.

Compulsory purchase usually happens to allow a public infrastructure project
to go ahead for the common good. However, as part of the Government’s Housing
for All plan, they aim to use CPOs to purchase up to 2,500 vacant properties
by 2026. These properties can then be resold to the public. This process will
be carried out by local authorities.

See our page on the [ compulsory purchase of property ](/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/compulsory-purchase-of-property/) for more
information on what to do if you receive a compulsory purchase order.

###  **Schemes to help people renovate and refurbish their homes**

If you own a property that is vacant, you may be able to get a grant to help
with the cost of doing it up.

These schemes can help you if you want to renovate or refurbish a home to live
in or to rent.

See **What schemes are available for fixing vacant homes?** below for more
information.

##  What schemes are available for fixing a vacant home?

There are a number of different grants and schemes available for repairing and
refurbishing vacant properties.

###  **Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant**

The [ Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/vacant-property-
refurbishment-grant/) provides funding so you can refurbish vacant and
derelict homes. It can also be used to renovate properties that have not been
used as residential properties before.

You can get the grant if you are refurbishing the vacant or derelict property
so you can live there, or so you can rent the property out.

###  **Repair and Leasing Scheme**

The purpose of the [ Repair and Leasing Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-
and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/repair-and-leasing-
scheme/) is to bring vacant properties in need of repair, back into use for
social housing. The scheme is aimed at people who own vacant properties.

If your vacant property is suitable for social housing, your local authority
or [ approved housing body (AHB)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) will pay to have it repaired. Then, you
lease, or make the property available, to the local authority or AHB, who will
use it for social housing.

###  **Buy and Renew Scheme**

The Buy and Renew Scheme helps local authorities buy and repair properties
that need to be refurbished, so they can be used for social housing.

Local authorities are responsible for deciding what properties are suitable
and may approach you if you own a vacant property.

If you agree, the local authority will buy your property from you and repair
it, so it can be used for social housing.

###  **Long Term Leasing Initiative**

The [ Long Term Leasing Initiative
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5976a-vacant-homes-schemes/#long-term-leasing-
initiative) lets you lease your vacant property to the local authority for up
to 25 years. The local authority will use the property for social housing and
they will be the landlord for any tenants.

You will get rent of up to 85% of the market rent per month, depending on the
type of property. The vacant property must be in good condition for this
initiative.

##  More information

You can read the Government’s [ Housing for All plan (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/197237/29edec3e-6664-4e62-86b2-af2e77f2f609.pdf#page=null)
for more information on how they plan to tackle vacant housing.

You can contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for information
about schemes to refurbish vacant homes.

You can also contact the [ Vacant Homes Officer in your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f59b3-vacant-homes-officer-contacts/) if
you have questions about these schemes.

_**Page edited:** 2 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/vacant-
homes/vacant-homes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Vacant%20homes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/vacant-
homes/vacant-homes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/vacant-
homes/vacant-homes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Vacant%20homes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/vacant-
homes/vacant-homes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Vacant Homes Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/vacant-homes-tax/)

Vacant Homes Tax is an annual tax on residential property that is stayed in
for less than 30 days in a 12-month period.

2133.0454

  * [ _Vacant sites_ ](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/vacant-sites/)

Each local authority has responsibility for registering vacant sites in its
area, communicating with owners and collecting the vacant sites levy.

1374.9026

  * [ _Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/vacant-property-refurbishment-grant/)

The Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant provides funding so you can refurbish
vacant properties to live in or rent out.

1312.9426

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

