**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health system
](/en/health/health-system/) > Registration of health and social care
professionals

#  Registration of health and social care professionals

  * Introduction 
  * Professions currently regulated by CORU 
  * Professions due to be regulated by CORU 
  * Making a complaint 

##  Introduction

CORU is the regulator for health workers and social care professionals. Its
role is to protect the public by promoting high standards of professional
conduct, education, training and competence through statutory registration of
health and social care professionals.

###  Social care workers

The Social Care Workers Register opened on 30 November 2023. The 2-year
transitional period for [ existing practitioners to apply to register
](https://www.coru.ie/social-care-workers/how-to-register-as-a-social-care-
worker/) started from that date. On 1 December 2025, the title 'social care
worker' will become a legally protected title in Ireland.

##  Professions currently regulated by CORU

CORU keeps a register for each of the professions that are under its remit. If
you are working in any of these professions, you must register with CORU when
your register is open.

The following are the registers that are currently open:

  * [ Dietitians ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/dietitians-registration-board/about-the-dietitians-registration-board/about-the-dietitians-registration-board.html)
  * [ Dispensing opticians ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/optical-registration-board/about-the-optical-registration-board/optical-registration-board.html)
  * [ Medical scientists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/medical-scientists-registration-board/about-the-medical-scientists-registration-board/about-the-medical-scientists-registration-board.html)
  * [ Occupational therapists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/occupational-therapists-registration-board/about-the-occupational-therapists-registration-board/occupational-therapists-registration-board.html)
  * [ Optometrists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/optical-registration-board/about-the-optical-registration-board/optical-registration-board.html)
  * [ Physical Therapists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/physiotherapists-registration-board/about-the-physiotherapists-registration-board/physiotherapists-registration-board.html)
  * [ Physiotherapists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/physiotherapists-registration-board/about-the-physiotherapists-registration-board/physiotherapists-registration-board.html)
  * [ Podiatrists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/podiatrists-registration-board/about-the-podiatrists-registration-board/)
  * [ Radiographers/radiation therapists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/radiographers-registration-board/about-the-radiographers-registration-board/about-the-radiographers-registration-board.html)
  * [ Social workers ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/social-workers-registration-board/about-the-social-workers-registration-board/about-the-social-workers-registration-board.html)
  * [ Speech and language therapists ](https://coru.ie/about-us/registration-boards/speech-and-language-therapists-registration-board/about-the-speech-and-language-therapists-board/about-the-speech-and-language-therapists-registration-board.html)
  * [ Social care workers ](https://www.coru.ie/social-care-workers/an%20introduction%20to%20social%20care%20work/registering-with-coru-as-a-social-care-worker/) (opened 30 November 2023) 

Once a register opens, there is a [ two-year transitional period
](https://coru.ie/health-and-social-care-professionals/registration/what-kind-
of-applicant-am-i-/transitional-period/transitional-period.html) after which
only professionals on the Register are legally allowed to use the professional
title.

You can [ check the Register ](https://www.coru.ie/check-the-register/) for a
profession to see if a particular professional is registered with CORU.

##  Professions due to be regulated by CORU

The system of statutory registration will eventually apply to the following
health and social care professions, regardless of whether they work in the
public or private sector or are self-employed:

  * Clinical biochemists 
  * Counsellors 
  * Orthoptists 
  * Psychologists 
  * Psychotherapists 

##  Making a complaint

You can complain to CORU about the fitness to practise of registered health
and social care professionals. This may include, for example, complaints of
professional misconduct or poor professional performance.

CORU can only look into events that have happened since 31 December 2014, when
it started accepting complaints.

If you want to make a complaint about a registered practitioner, complete
CORUâ€™s Fitness to Practise Complaint Form.

[ The Fitness to Practise complaint form, and further information on the
complaints process ](https://coru.ie/public-protection/fitness-to-
practise/about-fitness-to-practise/) , is available on the CORU website.

The Regulated Professions (Health and Social Care) (Amendment) Act 2020
introduced changes to the complaint system and added another ground for
complaint. You can [ read more on the CORU website. ](https://coru.ie/public-
protection/fitness-to-practise/recent-changes/)

###  CORU Health and Social Care Professionals Council

Infinity Building  
George's Court  
George's Lane  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 E98Y

**Tel:** (01) 293 3160

**Homepage:** [ http://www.coru.ie/ ](http://www.coru.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@coru.ie ](mailto:info@coru.ie)

_**Page edited:** 16 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Registration%20of%20health%20and%20social%20care%20professionals&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Registration%20of%20health%20and%20social%20care%20professionals&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mental health professionals_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-professionals/)

This document describes the roles and functions of mental health
professionals.

1814.7213

  * [ _Maternity care and the public health nurse_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-nurse/)

A description of the postnatal care provided by your public health nurse.

1603.0647

  * [ _Health care for new residents_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/health-care-in-ireland/)

Outline of health care services in Ireland, including public and private
health care, and health insurance.

1340.7372

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

