**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ COVID-19
](/en/health/covid19/) > Face masks during COVID-19

#  Face masks during COVID-19

  * Introduction 
  * Who is not recommended to wear a facemask? 
  * Further information on face masks 

##  Introduction

You can wear a face mask to help stop the spread of COVID-19 and other
infections, but it is no longer mandatory to wear one on public transport,
shops, schools or any other indoor public areas.

If you are wearing a face mask you may be asked to remove your face mask to
verify your age or identity to staff.

Staff in restaurants, pubs, hotels and other hospitality settings do not need
to wear a face mask.

####  Face masks in healthcare settings

You may be asked to wear a face mask when visiting some health and care
settings. The healthcare staff will let you know if you need to. If you have
symptoms of COVID-19, cold or flu, it may not be safe to visit a health or
care setting. Contact them for advice before visiting.

##  Who is not recommended to wear a facemask?

Face masks are not recommended for some people, including children under 9.
However, children under 9 may be asked to wear one by a healthcare worker at a
doctor’s clinic or hospital.

Face masks should not be worn by people who:

  * Have difficulty breathing 
  * Feel uncomfortable wearing a face mask 
  * Have difficulty communicating 

##  Further information on face masks

The HSE website has [ more information on what kind of face mask you can use
and how to wear them properly
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/preventing-the-spread/when-to-wear-
face-covering/#who-should-wear-a-face-mask) .

Check [ what to do if you or your child gets COVID19
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/if-you-have-covid-19/) and [ when
it’s safe to send your child to school.
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/if-you-have-covid-19/children/)

_**Page edited:** 20 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/face-
coverings-during-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Face%20masks%20during%20COVID-19&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/face-
coverings-during-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/face-
coverings-during-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Face%20masks%20during%20COVID-19&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/face-
coverings-during-covid19/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet: One-Parent Family Payment and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-one-parent-family-payment-and-income-from-work/)

This worksheet shows the effect of income from work on your One-Parent Family
Payment.

923.6259

  * [ _How pensions are assessed during a separation, divorce and dissolution_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)

When you end a relationship by judicial separation, divorce or dissolution,
the court can decide to share your pension with your former partner and (or)
any dependent children. This is called a pension adjustment order.

917.9352

  * [ _COVID-19 recovery and cost of living business supports_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/covid-19-recovery-cost-of-living-business-supports/)

This page summarises the supports for businesses as they recover from COVID-19
disruptions and deal with the rising costs of living.

819.10425

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

