**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) > [ Local
authority housing grants and supports ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/) > Improvement Works in
Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme

#  Improvement Works in Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme

  * What is the Improvement Work in Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme? 
  * Do I qualify for the scheme? 
  * How much does it cost? 
  * How do I apply? 

##  What is the Improvement Work in Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme?

The Improvement Work in Lieu of Local Authority Housing Scheme (IWILS) allows
your local authority to improve privately owned accommodation, which is
unsuitable for you, instead of providing you with local authority housing.

For example, if are on the social housing waiting list and you decide to move
into a privately owned home, the local authority may pay to extend or improve
the home, so you can live there. If the home is suitable for you when the work
is complete, your housing needs will have been met and you will be removed
from the social housing waiting list.

The [ Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1992/act/18/section/5/enacted/en/html)
sets-out the main rules of this scheme.

##  Do I qualify for the scheme?

You may qualify for the scheme if:

  * Your application for social housing has been approved 
  * You are a local authority tenant or a tenant purchaser who wants to move to a private home and return your present home to the local authority 
  * You are a tenant of an [ approved housing body ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) (AHB) and you want to buy a private house and return your present house to the AHB 
  * You own your home, but it is overcrowded or sub-standard and you canâ€™t afford to improve it 

##  How much does it cost?

The local authority will organise and pay for the work. You will pay a charge
to the local authority for the works based on how much you can afford. The
charge will last for a maximum of 15 years. If you have paid for the full cost
of the works during the 15-year period, the charge will stop. If you sell your
home during the 15 years, or before you have repaid the cost of the works, you
will have to make a repayment to the local authority.

##  How do I apply?

You apply to your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for this
scheme. Contact them if you have questions about the scheme and to check if it
operates in your area.

###  How does the local authority decide on applications?

When deciding whether to adapt the home, the local authority will consider:

  * The urgency of your housing needs 
  * How cost-effective your proposal is 

  

_**Page edited:** 13 March 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/improvement-
works-in-lieu-of-local-authority-housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Improvement%20Works%20in%20Lieu%20of%20Local%20Authority%20Housing%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/improvement-
works-in-lieu-of-local-authority-housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/improvement-
works-in-lieu-of-local-authority-housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Improvement%20Works%20in%20Lieu%20of%20Local%20Authority%20Housing%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/improvement-
works-in-lieu-of-local-authority-housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Local authority home improvement loans_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/local-authority-home-improvement-loans/)

Local authority loans are available to owner-occupiers towards the cost of
necessary works to improve, repair or extend their houses.

2607.6885

  * [ _Buying or inheriting a local authority home_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/buying-or-inheriting-a-local-authority-home/)

Schemes for local authority tenants to buy their homes at a discount as well
ways in which you might inherit one..

2034.1456

  * [ _Local Authority Purchase and Renovation Loan_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/local-authority-purchase-and-renovation-loan/)

Government-backed mortgage and loan that helps you to buy and renovate a
derelict or uninhabitable home.

1723.7328

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

