**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Care in your community ](/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/) > Dietitians

#  Dietitians

  * What is a dietician? 
  * What happens at an appointment with a dietician? 
  * How to apply for dietician services 
  * How much does a dietician cost? 
  * More information 

##  What is a dietician?

A dietician is a health professional who is qualified to give information on
all aspects of nutrition, diet and other areas to help you stay healthy and
manage illness.

You can visit a dietitian in a hospital (as an in-patient or outpatient) or in
the community (at a clinic or in a care centre).

##  What happens at an appointment with a dietician?

Your dietician will try to find out if your diet and lifestyle are causing or
contributing to the health issue you are experiencing. Your dietician may:

  * Take measurements like your height, weight and, sometimes, your waist 
  * Ask you about your usual diet, lifestyle, medical history, experiences and feelings about food and weight issues 
  * Help you to plan changes and set goals to improve your diet and overall health. 

A dietician can help with many different health issues, for example, anaemia,
diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, coeliac disease, irritable bowel
syndrome, an eating disorder, swallowing problems, weight issues (overweight
or underweight) and constipation.

##  How to apply for dietician services

You can be referred to a dietician by a doctor, nurse or other health
professional. You may also be able to refer yourself directly to a dietician.

Contact your [ Local Health Office
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) or [ health centre
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/healthcentres/) for more information
and to check if there is a dietician service available in your area

###  **How to find a dietician**

You can [ check the CORU register
](https://system.coru.ie/index.php/SearchMember/Find) to find a registered
dietitian in your area.

The [ Irish Nutrition and Dietetic Institute ](http://www.indi.ie) is the
professional organisation for dietitians in Ireland. It provides a facility to
' [ Find a Dietitian ](https://www.indi.ie/find-a-dietitian.html) ' on its
website.

##  How much does a dietician cost?

If you are referred, you may be able to get dietetic services for free through
[ the public health service ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-
executive/) . Depending on your local area, there may be waiting lists and
limited availability of a dietician.

If you go to a dietician as a private patient, you will be charged for the
service. You may be able to get some money back if you have [ private health
insurance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/private-health-insurance/) and claim [ tax relief for medical expenses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-
and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-expenses/) .

##  More information

Dietitians are regulated and [ registered by CORU ](/en/health/health-
system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/) Health and
Social Care Professionals Council.

The HSE website has information on [ Dietitian support for children with a
disability. ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/disability/childrens-
services/services/dietitian/)

###  Irish Nutrition and Dietetic Institute

Ashgrove House  
c/o Airfield Estate  
Overend Avenue  
Dundrum  
Dublin 14  
D14 EE77  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 215 0508

**Homepage:** [ https://www.indi.ie ](https://www.indi.ie)

**Email:** [ info@indi.ie ](mailto:info@indi.ie)

_**Page edited:** 1 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/dietician-clinical-
nutritionists/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Dietitians&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/dietician-clinical-
nutritionists/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/dietician-clinical-
nutritionists/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Dietitians&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/dietician-clinical-
nutritionists/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Registration of health and social care professionals_ ](/en/health/health-system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/)

Health and social care professionals are regulated by CORU. There is a process
for making complaints about the fitness to practice of registered
professionals.

803.77423

  * [ _Overview of mental health and mental illness_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-and-mental-illness/)

An overview of the mental health category including links to documents on
mental health services, community care, and the Mental Health Act 2001.

519.24164

  * [ _Diet and heating supplements_ ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/diet-and-heating-supplements/)

Additional weekly supplements for special diets and heating requirements are
available under the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme.

510.26797

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

