**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Food safety
](/en/health/food-safety/) > Food safety and environmental health services

#  Food safety and environmental health services

  * Introduction 
  * Who is responsible for food safety in Ireland? 
  * Food safety laws 
  * Who is responsible for food safety in the European Union? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

In Ireland and the European Union, different agencies are responsible for food
safety and environmental health services.

This document explains what the agencies do, and how to get in contact with
them.

##  Who is responsible for food safety in Ireland?

###  Government departments

The [ Department of Health ](/en/health/health-system/department-of-health-
and-children/) is responsible for the overall policy on food hygiene and
safety in Ireland.

The [ Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine
](http://www.agriculture.gov.ie/) is responsible for animal health and
welfare, as well as some areas of plant health. It is also in charge of
monitoring milk pasteurisation, slaughterhouses, meat processing plants and
egg product facilities.

###  The Food Safety Authority of Ireland

The [ Food Safety Authority of Ireland ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-
authority-of-ireland/) (FSAI) is an independent statutory organisation. It
protects consumers by ensuring that food safety and hygiene standards are met
in shops, restaurants, hotels, market stalls and fishing vessels.

It does this by:

  * Sending food safety inspectors to test food samples for contamination 
  * Training food safety inspectors and other food industry workers on food law 
  * Telling the public when there is a food safety issue, such as a product recall or restaurant closure 
  * Investigating food labels and fraudulent food 
  * Developing food safety guidelines 
  * Advising on national nutrition policy 

The FSAI also works with other state agencies to ensure that food law is
enforced, including the [ Sea-Fisheries Protection Authority
](http://www.sfpa.ie/) and the [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) .

If you would like to make a food safety complaint about a food outlet, such as
a supermarket or restaurant, you can [ submit a complaint form
](https://www.fsai.ie/makeitbetter/) to the FSAI. They will refer your
complaint to the appropriate [ Environmental Health Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/environmental-health-
officers.html) for investigation.

###  Safefood

[ Safefood ](https://www.safefood.net/) is a cross-border organisation that
promotes food safety and nutrition on the island of Ireland. It:

  * Provides healthy eating and food safety advice to the public 
  * Carries out research into food safety 
  * Carries out surveillance of diet-related disease, including obesity 

###  The Sea-Fisheries Protection Authority

The [ Sea-Fisheries Protection Authority ](https://www.sfpa.ie/) (SFPA) is
responsible for seafood safety and sea-fisheries protection in Ireland. It:

  * Monitors and inspects food safety controls on fishing vessels and in aquaculture production areas 
  * Monitors establishments’ handling, preparation and processing of seafood (excluding retail sale) 

###  The Health Service Executive

The [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](/en/health/health-system/health-
service-executive/) employs Environmental Health Officers to investigate food
safety complaints. You can [ find contact details for your local Environmental
Health Officer ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/environmental-
health-officers.html) on the HSE website.

Environmental Health Officers also:

  * Inspect all premises where food is manufactured or sold 
  * Enforce the [ ban on smoking ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/smoking-in-the-workplace/) in public places 
  * Enforce public health alcohol legislation 
  * Enforce the rules on sale and storage of poisons 

Environmental Health Officers have other public health and environmental
responsibilities, including pest control, monitoring of temporary dwellings,
and inspection of public buildings such as schools and places of
entertainment.

###  The Health Products Regulatory Authority

The [ Health Products Regulatory Authority ](http://www.hpra.ie/) is the
statutory body that regulates medicines, medical devices and other health
products. It was formerly known as the Irish Medicines Board (IMB).

##  Food safety laws

You can find [ information on Irish and European food laws
](https://www.fsai.ie/enforcement-and-legislation/legislation/food-
legislation) on the Food Safety Authority of Ireland website.

##  Who is responsible for food safety in the European Union?

The [ European Food Safety Authority ](http://www.efsa.europa.eu/) is an
independent EU agency whose main role is to provide independent scientific
advice. It also assesses risks relating to the food chain and informs the
public accordingly.

While the European Food Safety Authority advises on possible food safety
risks, other EU institutions (including the European Commission, Parliament
and Council) are responsible for risk management. These EU institutions take
advice from the European Food Safety Authority, and then propose and adopt
legislation. They also enforce regulatory and control measures if needed.

The [ European Commission ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-
institutions/european-commission/) includes a [ Directorate-General for Health
and Food Safety ](http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_food-safety/index_en.htm) .
This Directorate General is responsible for EU policy on food safety and
health. It also monitors the implementation of related laws. You can find the
latest [ EU food safety news and reports
](https://ec.europa.eu/info/departments/health-and-food-safety_en) on the
Directorate General’s website.

The [ EU Health and Food Audits and Analysis
](https://food.ec.europa.eu/horizontal-topics/official-controls-and-
enforcement/health-and-food-audits-and-analysis_en) \- formerly the EU Food
and Veterinary Office - is responsible for monitoring food compliance with
various EU laws, including those on food hygiene. It inspects and audits EU
states and countries exporting to the EU. It also carries out audits regarding
animal health and welfare, plant health, and the use of chemicals (such as
pesticides, veterinary medicines and growth stimulants).

##  Further information

###  Food Safety Authority of Ireland

The Exchange  
George's Dock  
IFSC  
Dublin 1  
D01 P2V6  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 8171300

**Fax:** +353 1 8171301

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fsai.ie ](http://www.fsai.ie)

**Email:** [ info@fsai.ie ](mailto:info@fsai.ie)

###  Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine

Johnstown Castle Estate  
Wexford  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 53 916 3400

**Homepage:** [ http://www.agriculture.gov.ie ](http://www.agriculture.gov.ie)

**Email:** [ ers@agriculture.gov.ie ](mailto:ers@agriculture.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 31 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Food%20safety%20and%20environmental%20health%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Food%20safety%20and%20environmental%20health%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Food safety and eating out_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-eating-out/)

Food safety protection for consumers.

2015.7239

  * [ _Food safety and food poisoning_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-food-poisoning/)

What to do if you have contracted food poisoning as a result of consuming
contaminated food.

1992.3672

  * [ _Food safety and shopping_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-shopping/)

Consumer advice on shopping for and storing food safely.

1897.955

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

