**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Food safety
](/en/health/food-safety/) > Food Safety Authority of Ireland

#  Food Safety Authority of Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * What does the FSAI do? 
  * Enforcement of food safety laws 
  * How to make a food safetycomplaint 
  * Contact information 

##  Introduction

The Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI) is an independent statutory
organisation. It was established by the Food Safety Authority of Ireland Act,
1998.

The FSAI protects consumers by ensuring that standards for food safety and
hygiene are met when food is consumed, produced, distributed or marketed in
Ireland. It works with other official agencies, including the Health Service
Executive (HSE), to enforce food safety legislation in Ireland.

This page explains what the FSAI does, how food safety laws are enforced, and
how to make a complaint about a food premises.

##  What does the FSAI do?

The FSAI is responsible for:

  * Sending food safety inspectors to test food samples for contamination 
  * Referring complaints about food safety from the public to the relevant Environmental Health Office 
  * Training food safety inspectors and other food industry workers about [ food law ](https://www.fsai.ie/enforcement-and-legislation/legislation/food-legislation)
  * Telling the public when there is a food safety issue, such as a [ product recall ](https://www.fsai.ie/news_centre/food_alerts.html) or [ restaurant closure ](https://www.fsai.ie/about/what-we-do/enforcement-compliance/enforcement-orders)
  * Investigating food labels and fraudulent food 
  * Developing [ food safety guidelines ](https://www.fsai.ie/publications/scientific-recommendations-for-healthy-eating-guid)
  * Advising on national nutrition policy 

The FSAI also works with other state agencies to ensure that food law is
enforced, including the [ Sea-Fisheries Protection Authority
](http://www.sfpa.ie/) and the [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) .

Read more about the [ role of the FSAI ](https://www.fsai.ie/about) on its
website.

###  Food safety assurance schemes

The FSAI may, either on its own or with food producers, set up schemes to
protect consumer interests – for example, the [ Bord Bia Quality Assurance
schemes ](https://www.bordbia.ie/farmers-growers/get-involved/become-quality-
assured/) .

These food safety schemes cover:

  * The promotion of best practice guidelines 
  * The preparation of guidelines on raw materials, processing, packaging, preparation, storage and handling 

##  Enforcement of food safety laws

The FSAI has service contracts with other official agencies, including the HSE
and the [ Sea-Fisheries Protection Authority ](http://www.sfpa.ie/) , to make
sure all food premises comply with food safety laws. The FSAI is responsible
for:

  * Co-ordinating the enforcement of food safety legislation in Ireland 
  * Supporting Ireland’s food safety regulators (such as Environmental Health Officers) to implement a fair, consistent and effective system of enforcement 
  * Managing risks in the food chain and responding to any national or international food incidents 
  * Ensuring the safety of the food chain by detecting, deterring and preventing breaches of food law 
  * Researching food safety through coordinated studies and scientific collaboration 

The FSAI can also seek reports from any state body on matters affecting food
safety. It reports to the Minister for Health.

###  Environmental Health Officers

The FSAI works with Environmental Health Officers from the HSE to inspect food
premises.

Environmental Health Officers can:

  * Enter and inspect food premises 
  * Secure a food premises for later inspection 
  * Inspect and, if necessary, remove records 
  * Take samples of food or related materials, and have these samples analysed 

It is an offence to obstruct an officer carrying out this duty.

You can find [ contact details for your local Environmental Health Officer
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/environmental-health-
officers.html) on the HSE website.

###  Improvement notices

If the Environmental Health Officer finds that a premises or a practice (such
as food handling or preparation) is likely to be a risk to public health, they
may give the owner an **improvement notice** . This includes:

  * The cause of the risk to public health 
  * The remedial action that needs to be taken 
  * The time limit for the owner to take remedial action 

###  **Improvement orders**

If the owner does not carry out the improvements as recommended by the
authorised officer, the FSAI or HSE may seek an **improvement order** from the
[ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) . An improvement
order outlines what needs to be improved upon, and the timeframe within which
the owner needs to do it.

###  Closure orders

If there is an immediate danger to public health, the authorised officer may
issue a **closure order** . This means the owner must close all or part of the
food premises until the issue has been resolved. A closure order may also be
issued if an improvement order is not acted on.

[ Closure and prohibition orders ](https://www.fsai.ie/about/what-we-
do/enforcement-compliance/enforcement-orders) are listed on the FSAI website.  

You can read about the [ orders and enforcement powers that the FSAI has
](https://www.fsai.ie/enforcement-and-legislation/enforcement/enforcement-
powers) .

You can make a formal complaint about food poisoning by either contacting [
your local Environmental Health Officer
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/environ/environmental-health-
officers.html) or by contacting the Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI).

You can complete a [ complaint form on the FSAI website
](https://www.fsai.ie/makeitbetter) . This form is confidential and will not
be shared with the restaurant or shop you are complaining about.

The FSAI will send your completed form to a HSE Environmental Health Officer
who will then investigate your complaint.

You can also ring the FSAI on **0818 33 66 77 or email info@fsai.ie**

##  How to make a food safetycomplaint

##  Contact information

###  Food Safety Authority of Ireland

The Exchange  
George's Dock  
IFSC  
Dublin 1  
D01 P2V6  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 8171300

**Fax:** +353 1 8171301

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fsai.ie ](http://www.fsai.ie)

**Email:** [ info@fsai.ie ](mailto:info@fsai.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-authority-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Food%20Safety%20Authority%20of%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-authority-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-authority-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Food%20Safety%20Authority%20of%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/food-
safety/food-safety-authority-of-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Food safety in the home_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-in-the-home/)

Practical advice and information on food safety in the home.

2414.1414

  * [ _Food safety and eating out_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-eating-out/)

Food safety protection for consumers.

2316.267

  * [ _Food safety and food poisoning_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-food-poisoning/)

What to do if you have contracted food poisoning as a result of consuming
contaminated food.

2261.539

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

