**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Local
authority and social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/) > Approved housing bodies

#  Approved housing bodies

  * What is an approved housing body (AHB)? 
  * What services do AHB's provide? 
  * How to apply for housing with an AHB 
  * How are AHBs regulated and what are their responsibilities? 
  * Useful contacts 

##  What is an approved housing body (AHB)?

Approved housing bodies (AHBs) are independent, not-for-profit organisations.
They provide affordable rented housing for people who cannot afford to pay
private sector rents or buy their own homes. Some AHBs provide housing
specifically for particular groups of people, such as older people or homeless
people. AHBs are also known as housing associations.

The term AHB also includes housing co-operatives. Housing co-operatives are
housing organisations that are controlled by their tenants. The tenants or
members of these co-operatives share responsibility for the management and
upkeep of their homes.

AHB's are known as _approved housing bodies_ because they are _approved_ under
the [ Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1992
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1992/act/18/section/6/enacted/en/html) .
This allows them to access assistance from local authorities to provide
housing.

##  What services do AHB's provide?

There are approximately 500 approved housing bodies in Ireland. They vary in
size and in the services that they provide. As well as providing affordable
rented housing, AHBs aim to encourage and promote community engagement and
development.

AHBs get government funding from local authorities to provide affordable
rented housing. They use this funding to:

  * Build new homes 
  * Buy existing homes 
  * Lease private homes 

Some AHBs were established by existing caring organisations to provide
services to specific groups, such as older people, people with disabilities or
homeless people. Some offer non-housing services, such as group meals, social
activities and welfare advice.

Some AHBs help people who want to return to live in Ireland. For example, [
Safe-Home Ireland ](https://safehomeireland.com/housing-assistance/) helps
older Irish-born emigrants living in rented accommodation abroad, who want to
return home, but cannot afford their own accommodation.  

##  How to apply for housing with an AHB

If you want to be housed by an AHB, you need to be on the local authority
housing waiting list in your area. To get on the waiting list you need to [
apply for, and be approved for social housing support ](/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing#laf763) .

To qualify for social housing support you must be eligible for and in need of
social housing. You must be able to show that:

  * Your income is below a certain level 
  * You do not have suitable alternative accommodation 
  * Your current accommodation is unsuitable 

Read more about how to qualify for social housing support and how to apply in
our page [ applying for local authority housing. ](/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/)

###  **Completing the social housing application form**

If you want to be considered for housing provided by an AHB, make sure you
tick the box marked **'approved housing body (AHB)' in the ‘Housing
Requirements’** section of the social housing application form.

Your [ local authority ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-
authorities/) will be able to tell you if there are approved housing bodies in
your area. In most cases, the local authority will refer you to an AHB if an
appropriate home comes up. A very small number of AHBs may accept direct
applications.

If you need help filling out the social housing application form, you can
contact your [ local Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) or your local authority for help.

##  How are AHBs regulated and what are their responsibilities?

Approved housing bodies are regulated by 2 organisations. The Approved Housing
Bodies Regulatory Authority (AHBRA) oversees the management and performance of
AHBs, ensuring that public investment in AHB housing is protected. The
Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) ensures that the rights and responsibilities
of AHB landlords and tenants are protected.

###  The Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority (AHBRA)

The Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority (AHBRA) was established in
2021. It is responsible for regulating approved housing bodies. It oversees
the administration, financial management and performance of AHBs. Its
functions include:

  * Maintaining a register of AHBs 
  * Developing standards for AHBs and ensuring that they are met 
  * Monitoring and investigating AHBs 

####  **Registering with the AHBRA**

The AHBRA took over responsibility for the AHB register on 1 January 2022.
Previously, the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage
maintained a register of AHBs. AHBs on the old register were automatically
transferred onto the new one and were ‘deemed registered’.

These AHBs [ still need to register directly with the AHBRA,
](https://www.ahbregulator.ie/registration/deemed-registered/) as there are
additional requirements to the new register. But, they have been given an
extended timeframe to do this. The length of time a ‘deemed registered AHB’ is
given to register with AHBRA depends on the number of homes they provide or
manage. You can find this information in the [ AHBRA’s Registration Policy
(pdf) ](https://www.ahbregulator.ie/app/uploads/2022/07/REGISTRATION-
POLICY.pdf) .

The AHBRA's [ registration process is slightly different for new AHBs
](https://www.ahbregulator.ie/registration/new-ahbs/) applying to register
with them.

All AHBs should contact the AHBRA to discuss their applications before
beginning the registration process. The AHBRA can give advice about the [
registration process ](https://www.ahbregulator.ie/registration/eligibility-
registration/) , eligibility criteria, application forms and information
requirements.

###  Residential Tenancies Board (RTB)

The Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) is responsible for regulating the rental
sector. It maintains a [ national register of tenancies
](https://www.rtb.ie/check/index.html) and provides a [ dispute resolution
service for tenants and landlords ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/) .

AHB’s have the same [ rights and obligations ](/en/housing/renting-a-
home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/landlords-rights-and-obligations/)
as private landlords. For example, they must [ register their tenancies
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-
responsibilities/registering-a-tenancy/) every year with the RTB. AHB tenants
have the same [ rights and obligations ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-
rights-and-responsibilities/tenants-rights-and-obligations/) as private
tenants, with some exceptions.

The [ Residential Tenancies (Amendment) Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/42/enacted/en/html) brought AHB
tenancies under the remit of the RTB and means that these tenancies are
covered by residential tenancies legislation.

##  Useful contacts

###  Co-operative Housing Ireland

Co-operative House  
11-12 Warrington Place  
Dublin 2  
D02 E221  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 661 2877

**Fax:** (01) 661 4462

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cooperativehousing.ie/
](http://www.cooperativehousing.ie/)

**Email:** [ admin@cooperativehousing.ie ](mailto:admin@cooperativehousing.ie)

###  Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority

4th Floor Grattan House,  
67-72 Mount Street Lower,  
Dublin 2,  
D02 H638

**Tel:** (01) 224 3900

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ahbregulator.ie/ ](https://www.ahbregulator.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@ahbregulator.ie ](mailto:info@ahbregulator.ie)

###  Residential Tenancies Board

PO Box 47  
Clonakilty  
Co. Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 9am to 5pm

**Tel:** 0818 303 037 or 01 702 8100

**Fax:** 0818 303 039

**Homepage:** [ http://www.rtb.ie/ ](http://www.rtb.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 1 July 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-
bodies/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Approved%20housing%20bodies&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-
bodies/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-
bodies/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Approved%20housing%20bodies&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/approved-housing-
bodies/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights as an approved housing body tenant_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/your-rights-as-an-ahb-tenant/)

Tenants of approved housing bodies have very similar rights to those of
private tenants.

1685.6857

  * [ _Minimum standards for rented housing_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/minimum-standards-for-rented-homes/)

Landlords are legally obliged to ensure that their properties comply with
minimum physical standards.

1449.1244

  * [ _Rent increases in private rented housing_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-increases-in-private-rented-housing/)

There are detailed rules governing the review and raising of private rents.

1426.2896

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

