**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Drugs and
medicines ](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/) > Prescription charges for
medical card holders

#  Prescription charges for medical card holders

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 

##  Introduction

If you have a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , there is a charge for [ prescribed medicines
](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/prescribed-drugs-and-medicines/) and other
items that you get on prescription from pharmacies.

The prescription charge is €1.50 for each item that is dispensed to you under
the medical card scheme, up to a maximum of €15 per month per person or
family.

For people aged **over 70** , the prescription charge is €1 per item, up to a
maximum of €10 per month per person or family.

Before 1 November 2020, the charges were €0.50 higher, with a monthly limit of
€20 (or €15 for over 70s).

##  Rules

If your pharmacy is aware of all your family members then you should not pay
more than the maximum per month. A family is defined as you, your spouse or
partner, any children under 16 years of age and any children between 16 and 21
years of age who are in full time education.

You can set your family up as a family group on [ the HSE website
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/medical-cards/prescription-charges-for-medical-
card-holders.html#Family-certificate) and print off a family certificate to
give to your pharmacist. This will show all of the members of your family so
that the pharmacy will not collect charges above the monthly limit.

If you do not have access to the internet you can get assistance from your [
Local Health Office ](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) or phone
0818 22 44 78 and they will take the details and send you the certificate.
Your local pharmacist may also be able to help you. You will need to have the
medical card number for each member of your family.

The prescription charges are eligible for [ tax relief for medical expenses
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-
expenses/) .

###  Refunds if you pay more than the monthly limit

The Health Service Executive (HSE) issues refunds automatically every 6
months, based on the information received from your pharmacy. Refunds are
issued for amounts over €10. Refunds under €10 are carried over to the next
refund payment date.

You can avoid the need for a refund if you and your family visit the same
pharmacy and your pharmacist can identify all of your family members.

If you have a question about refunds you can phone 0818 22 44 78 or email [
clientregistration@hse.ie ](mailto:clientregistration@hse.ie)

###  Medical card holders who do not pay the prescription charge

Certain people and certain products are not liable for the prescription
charge:

  * People who qualify for the [ Long Term Illness Scheme ](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/long-term-illness-scheme/) are entitled to get the drugs and medicines for the treatment of that illness free of charge. 
  * People who have [ a Health Amendment Act Card ](/en/health/health-services/blood-and-organ-donation/hepatitis-c-and-health-amendment-act-cards/) are entitled to get approved prescribed drugs and medicines free of charge. 
  * Children in the care of the HSE who have their own medical card. This includes children in residential care, foster care, foster care with relatives and other care placements. 
  * Asylum seekers living in direct provision accommodation. 
  * There is no charge for methadone supplied to patients participating in the Methadone Treatment Scheme. 
  * High Tech products and medicines, usually only prescribed in hospitals, for example anti-rejection drugs for transplant patients or medicines used in conjunction with chemotherapy. As the supply of High Tech Medicines operates on the basis of a patient care fee, a prescription charge does not apply. 

_**Page edited:** 18 February 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-
and-medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-
holders/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Prescription%20charges%20for%20medical%20card%20holders&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-
and-medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-
holders/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-and-
medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-
holders/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Prescription%20charges%20for%20medical%20card%20holders&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-
and-medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-
holders/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Services for medical card and GP visit card holders_ ](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/gp-services-to-medical-card-holders/)

Family doctors (GPs) provide certain services to medical card and GP visit
card holders free of charge.

2070.4526

  * [ _Over 70s means test for medical cards_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-over-70s/)

How your income is assessed for the medical card income limits if you are over
70 years of age.

1648.5757

  * [ _Emergency medical cards_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/emergency-medical-card/)

In certain emergency situations, a healthcare professional can apply for you
to get a medical card known as an emergency medical card.

1525.5292

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

