**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Care in your community ](/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/) > Occupational therapy services

#  Occupational therapy services

  * What is an occupational therapist? 
  * What will the occupational therapist do? 
  * Where do I find an occupational therapist? 
  * Applying for an occupational therapist 

##  What is an occupational therapist?

If you have a disability, illness or are affected by aging, an occupational
therapist (OT) may be able to help you.

Occupational therapists work with you if you have difficulty with practical
everyday activities to help you become more independent in your day-to-day
life. For example, you may need an OT if you are diagnosed with a neurological
problem or a physical injury.

Occupational therapists can help people of all ages including elderly people,
adults, babies, children and young people. You can also read our page on [
caring for a child with a disability
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/children-s-
health/caring-for-a-child-with-a-disability/) .

##  What will the occupational therapist do?

If you need help to overcome practical problems in your everyday life, the
occupational therapist can:

  * Provide aids and appliances from the HSE 
  * Give you a certificate to show you need the [ housing adaptation grant for people with a disability ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-disability/)
  * Provide advice and assistance to you, your family or your carers about what changes or adaptations need to be made 

###  How do I get an occupational therapist?

First, an occupational therapist will assess your ability to do daily life
tasks, for example â€“ dressing, eating, bathing, etc.

They will also check your home to help them decide what assistance you need
from aids and appliances. For example, a wheelchair, chair lift or downstairs
bathroom.

##  Where do I find an occupational therapist?

Many occupational therapists work in [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/health-service-
executive/) in [ Local Health Offices
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO) or Primary Care Teams.

You may have to join a waiting list to see an occupational therapist and
applications are prioritised according to the need of patients locally.

You can check [ this directory of occupational therapists
](https://www.aoti.ie/) in private practice from the Association of
Occupational Therapists of Ireland.

[ CORU ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/) is the regulator
and has a [ register of occupational therapists in public and private
healthcare services ](https://system.coru.ie/index.php/SearchMember/Find)

##  Applying for an occupational therapist

You can apply to your [ Local Health Office
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO) for an occupational therapist, or
you can be referred by a [ public health nurse
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-
community/public-health-nurses/) , family doctor (GP), physiotherapist, speech
and language therapist or hospital.

If you are prescribed aids and appliances, you can get them free if you have a
medical card, a [ Health Amendment Act Card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/blood-and-
organ-donation/hepatitis-c-and-health-amendment-act-cards/) or are on the [
Long Term Illness Scheme.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/long-term-
illness-scheme/)

###  Association of Occupational Therapists of Ireland

Office 201  
18 Herbert Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (01) 874 8136

**Homepage:** [ http://www.aoti.ie/ ](http://www.aoti.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@aoti.ie ](mailto:info@aoti.ie)

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/occupational-therapy-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Occupational%20therapy%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/occupational-therapy-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/occupational-therapy-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Occupational%20therapy%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/care-in-your-community/occupational-therapy-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Occupational Injuries Scheme - Introduction_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)

The Occupational Injuries Benefit scheme provides a range of benefits for
people injured or incapacitated by an accident at work or while travelling
directly to or from work.

1136.1182

  * [ _Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/)

Information about Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

1126.3962

  * [ _Inspector of Mental Health Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/inspector-of-mental-health-services/)

This document describes the Inspector of Mental Health Services who is
appointed under the Mental Health Act 2001.

1105.1368

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

