**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Buying a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/) > Property deeds

#  Property deeds

  * What are property title and deeds? 
  * Registering property ownership with the Land Registry 
  * The Registry of Deeds system 
  * Property registration and property fraud 
  * Where to apply 

##  What are property title and deeds?

Property title is the legal way of saying you own property or land. Property
deeds are the legal documents used to transfer the ownership of property from
one person to another.

If you are buying or selling a property you will come across these terms.
However, usually your solicitor will look after recording the property
transaction and change of ownership when you buy or sell a home.

###  Recording property transactions

There are 2 separate systems for recording property transactions:

  * The **Land Registry system** is where property _ownership_ (or _title_ ) is registered, and property deeds are filed. 
  * The **Registry of Deeds** **system** records the existence of deeds and conveyances for _unregistered property_ . (Unregistered property is property where the title is not registered with the Land Registry.) 

Your [ solicitor
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) will
know which system to record your property transaction with. Both systems are
managed by [ Tailte Éireann ](https://www.tailte.ie/registration/) .

Property registration in Ireland is gradually moving away from the older
system that records deeds in the Registry of Deeds to the ‘title registration
system’ at the Land Registry.

Since June 2011, it is compulsory for unregistered property purchased in
Ireland to be registered with the Land Registry. Currently, almost 90% of the
legal titles in Ireland are now registered in the Land Registry.

##  Registering property ownership with the Land Registry

When title or ownership of property is registered with the [ Land Registry
](https://www.tailte.ie/registration/land-registry/land-registration-in-
ireland/) , the Land Registry files the deeds and enters details about the
property and its ownership on _folios._

A folio:

  * Describes the registered property 
  * Refers to a plan on the Land Registry maps 
  * Gives the name and address of the registered owner 
  * Describes any burdens on the property, for example, [ rights of way ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/) , fishing rights or mortgages 

Property registered at the Land Registry on a folio is known as _registered
land_ . The folio is guaranteed by the State to be a confirmed record of the
ownership of the property. Applications to register title must be made by
qualified legal practitioners.

###  **Land Registry maps**

The Land Registry maintains maps or _title plans_ of property described in its
registers. These maps do not indicate if a boundary includes a hedge, wall or
ditch, so the registers are not conclusive on boundaries. Any dispute about
boundaries must be resolved by the people involved. If they cannot reach
agreement on the boundaries, the courts will resolve the matter.

###  **How do I find out who owns a property**

You can use a folio to find out who owns a property, without having to read
the original deeds. You can:

  * Search for a folio or map on [ landdirect.ie ](https://www.landdirect.ie/pramap.aspx/) . It costs €5 to view a folio. 
  * Inspect a plain copy of a folio in Tailte Éireann’s public offices. This costs €5. 
  * Request a certified copy of a folio or folio and map. This costs €40. 

You can search using a person's name, an address or by using the maps on [
landdirect.ie ](https://www.landdirect.ie/index) . There is more information
about this in Tailte Eireann’s [ FAQs on Land Registry
](https://www.tailte.ie/registration/land-registry/frequently-asked-
questions/) .

###  **How do I register that I have paid off my mortgage**

When you finish paying off your mortgage you will receive a Deed of Discharge
from your lending institution. This should be lodged in the Land Registry with
a completed Application for Registration and a fee of €40.

##  The Registry of Deeds system

If property title or ownership is not registered with the Land Registry, it is
known as _unregistered property._ The Registry of Deeds records the existence
of deeds and conveyances of unregistered property.

When a deed is lodged in the Registry of Deeds it must have an ROD application
form, which gives a summary of the deed. The Registry of Deeds file the ROD
application form as a permanent record of the property transaction. The
property deeds are returned to the person who lodged them, they are not filed
with the Registry of Deeds.

An ROD application form (previously known as a memorial) contains:

  * The date of the deed 
  * The names and descriptions of all parties and all witnesses to the deed 
  * A description of the property 

The new signed deed becomes the latest deed showing the ownership of the
property, adding to a chain of deeds that go back to when the property was
first registered. Deeds that are recorded in the Registry of Deeds have a
legal priority over unrecorded deeds and other deeds recorded at a later time.

You can [ inspect an ROD application form
](https://www.tailte.ie/registration/registry-of-deeds/registry-of-deeds-
records/) to see who owns an unregistered property. However, if you are buying
unregistered land, you must read the actual deeds to examine the title to the
property.

###  **What if I have lost the deeds to a property registered with the
Registry of Deeds?**

If you lose the deeds to a property which is not registered with the Land
Registry, you can get a copy of your memorial or ROD application form from the
Registry of Deeds. These documents summarise the change of ownership or
mortgage and can be used to replace a lost or misplaced deed. An ROD
application form does not have the same legal effect as a deed, but it
provides secondary evidence of the contents of the deed. You can get a
certified copy of an ROD application form for €20 and a plain copy for €1 per
page.

##  Property registration and property fraud

Tailte Éireann has a property alert service so property owners can monitor
their registered properties for fraudulent activity. Property fraud could
involve someone pretending to be you and trying to sell or mortgage your
property without you knowing. If you sign up to the property alert service,
you will get an email or text if someone lodges an application about your
property with Tailte Éireann. If the activity is fraudulent you can take
action. To find out more, or to sign up for the service, visit [ landdirect.ie
](https://www.landdirect.ie/pramap/#aboutPAS) .

##  Where to apply

###  Registry of Deeds

Henrietta Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 EK82  
Ireland

**Tel:** 051 303000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.tailte.ie/ ](https://www.tailte.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 16 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/property-deeds/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Property%20deeds&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/property-deeds/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/property-deeds/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Property%20deeds&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/property-deeds/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Deferring payment of the Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-tax/)

The Local Property Tax is a tax payable on residential property. This document
gives information about who qualifies for deferral and how to defer payment of
the tax.

1632.5483

  * [ _How to value your property for Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/valuing-property-for-lpt/)

Local Property Tax is a self-assessment tax. There are tools and information
sources that you can use to help you assess the value of your residential
property.

1494.817

  * [ _Property rights and the breakdown of a relationship_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/property-rights-and-the-breakdown-of-a-cohabiting-relationship/)

This page explains whether spouses and cohabiting partners have any property
rights following the breakdown of their relationship.

1419.7168

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

