**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Mental health ](/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/) > Mental health services

#  Mental health services

  * Introduction 
  * Urgent help for a mental health crisis 
  * Mental health services in your community 
  * When you are referred to a psychiatrist 
  * Admission to hospital 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you have a mental illness, your entitlement to care and treatment is the
same as if you are suffering from another illness. You have the same [
entitlement to general health services
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-
public-health-services/) and to [ community care services
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-
community/) .

##  Urgent help for a mental health crisis

###

If you need to [ get urgent help for a mental health issue
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/services-support/get-urgent-help/) and
your GP is not available, you can contact a [ GP out-of-hours service
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/primarycare/gp-out-of-hours/) or
access mental health services through your local mental health unit or
hospital. You can get help by text message at any time using the [ 50808 text
service ](https://crisistextline.ie/) .

Call 999 or 112 if you or someone you know needs emergency help.

###

##  Mental health services in your community

The HSE has [ information, advice, guides, and activities
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/self-help/) for you to help your own
mental health

It also has a [ list of organisations that can help you with your mental
health ](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/services-support/supports-
services/) . You can access most of the services listed here without a
referral, but your GP can give you advice on mental health services.

###  **Mental Health information phone line**

You can find out about the mental health services and supports available in
your area, by calling the [ Your Mental Health information line
](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/mental-health/yourmentalhealth-information-
line.html) on Freephone 1800 111 888. You can also send a free text to [ 50808
](https://crisistextline.ie/) to get support and information about services.

###  **Talking to your GP about your mental health**

You can talk to your family doctor (GP) about mental health concerns. Many
people go to their GP with mental health problems such as depression or
anxiety. In some cases, your GP may refer you to a [ mental health
professional ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-
professionals/) such as a psychiatrist, clinical psychologist or addiction
counsellor.

###  **Counselling and talk therapy**

Talking therapies are psychological treatments that involve talking to a
trained therapist to support you to deal with your thoughts and feelings. The
[ HSE has further information and organisations who provide talk therapy
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/services-support/talking-therapies/) .

###  **Free counselling**

You can get free counselling from the [ National Counselling Service (NCS)
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/services-support/ncs/) if you are aged
over 18 and:

  * Have a medical card or, 
  * Have experienced childhood abuse or neglect or, 
  * Are a former resident of a [ mother and baby home ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/mother-and-baby-homes/)

###

###  **Mental health services at your Local Health Office**

The [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](http://hse.ie/) provides a range of
community-based mental health services. The mental health team normally
includes a consultant psychiatrist, a registrar in psychiatry, and nurses. In
many areas, the services of an addiction counsellor, psychologist, [ social
worker ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/social-work-
services/) and [ occupational therapist ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-
your-community/occupational-therapy-services/) are available.

##  When you are referred to a psychiatrist

You may be referred for an out-patient appointment or, in an emergency, an
immediate appointment may be arranged. The psychiatrist will meet with you to
discuss your mental health problems and to explain the treatment options
available.

###  Out-patient treatment

Out-patient treatment options include:

  * Out-patient clinics 
  * Day hospitals or day centres 
  * Home visits from the mental health team 
  * Clinical psychological services 
  * Addiction counselling services 
  * Social work or occupational therapy services 
  * GP care 

**Out-patient and community services**

The aim of out-patient and community services is to treat and support
individuals in their own homes and communities where possible. GPs are central
to the delivery of community care services.

An **out-patient clinic** is a clinic that you attend for an assessment or for
follow-up treatment. These facilities are often based in community health
centres and are staffed by a consultant psychiatrist, community psychiatric
nurses and other members of the mental health team, as required.

A **day hospital** is a day facility you can attend from home or from a care
setting, for assessment, treatment or nursing care. It is usually seen as an
alternative to hospital admission. The consultant psychiatrist who sees you in
an out-patient clinic will usually treat you in the day hospital also.

You may attend a **day centre** in your community for continuing support. Day
centres are staffed by psychiatric nurses and, occasionally, occupational
therapists. The aim is to provide activities in a friendly and supportive
environment.

A **sheltered workshop** is a community facility where the emphasis is on work
activity suited to your skills or needs with support and guidance from trained
staff.

###

##  Admission to hospital

###

Most people who have mental health problems are treated without going to
hospital or may go to hospital for treatment by choice. If you are admitted by
choice you are known as a voluntary patient.

Occasionally, someone may have to be admitted for mental health treatment and
care against their will. This is called involuntary admission. You can only be
admitted against your will under rules that are set out in law to make sure
this only happens if it is absolutely necessary.

For more information see our document on [ admission to a psychiatric hospital
](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/admission-to-a-psychiatric-
hospital/) .

###  **In-patient services**

In-patient services are usually medical and nursing care provided in a
hospital.

If you are admitted to hospital, you are assessed and treated in an area
called an acute admission ward. After treatment, most patients will be
discharged home for follow-up care by the out-patients clinic or day hospital.
Some patients may be transferred from an admission unit to a continuing care
ward or a rehabilitation ward according to their needs.

Sometimes it may be necessary to care for and treat a patient in a safe and
restricted environment. This is usually a small unit within a hospital setting
staffed by highly trained psychiatric nurses. The unit is locked and the
environment is secure.

###  Residential units

**High-support group home** : This is a home for people who do not need to be
in hospital and who can live in the community but who require 24-hour nursing
care and support for a variety of reasons. Some people may spend a period of
time in a high support residence and then move on into a medium or low support
residence.

**Medium-support group home:** This is a home for people who are fairly
independent in most areas of their everyday living skills but who require some
assistance or support in certain areas, for example, managing finances or
cooking skills. For this reason, the home is staffed, usually by day only, by
either a nurse or a trained care staff.

**Low-support group home:** These residential units are for individuals who
are independent in most, if not all, areas of their everyday living skills.
The overall upkeep and management of the group home is co-ordinated by the
hospital management. The residents may have a community psychiatric nurse or
supervisor who will check on them as required.

##  Further information

To find out about the mental health supports available in your area, call the
[ YourMentalHealth information line ](https://www2.hse.ie/wellbeing/mental-
health/yourmentalhealth-information-line.html) on Freephone 1800 111 888.

You can [ find local mental health services on yourmentalhealth.ie
](http://www.yourmentalhealth.ie/Supports-services/Find-services/) .

You can find out more about the different [ mental health professionals
](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-professionals/) .

_**Page edited:** 29 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Mental%20health%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Mental%20health%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Inspector of Mental Health Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/inspector-of-mental-health-services/)

This document describes the Inspector of Mental Health Services who is
appointed under the Mental Health Act 2001.

2716.9207

  * [ _Overview of mental health and mental illness_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-and-mental-illness/)

An overview of the mental health category including links to documents on
mental health services, community care, and the Mental Health Act 2001.

2299.0796

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

2187.572

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

