**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Reproductive health ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/) > Contraception

#  Contraception

  * Contraceptive services in Ireland 
  * Free Contraception Scheme 
  * Does the medical card cover contraception? 
  * Can I get free condoms in Ireland? 
  * Emergency contraception 
  * Unplanned pregnancy in Ireland 
  * More information on contraception 

##  Contraceptive services in Ireland

Birth control or contraception is the use of medicines, devices, or surgery to
prevent pregnancy.

You can get contraception from most pharmacies in Ireland. Most contraception
will need a prescription from a GP but you do not need a prescription for [
emergency contraception ](https://sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/emergency-contraception/) or [ condoms
](/en/health/health-services/women-s-health/family-planning-services#l98f74) .

You can get prescriptions for contraceptive drugs and devices, as well as
advice about contraception from GPs, voluntary organisations and private
family planning clinics. Voluntary and private family planning clinics usually
have charges but may waive them or have lower fees in certain cases.

You can [ read about the different contraceptive options and services on the
HSE website sexualwellbeing.ie ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/your-choices/) . This includes information on:

  * Hormonal, non-hormonal and long-acting reversible contraception (LARCs) 
  * Permanent contraception such as male vasectomy and female sterilisation. 

###  Can I get free contraception in Ireland?

You can get free contraception in Ireland if you:

  * Have a [ medical card (see below) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/contraception/#694231) , or 
  * You qualify for the Free Contraception Scheme 

##  Free Contraception Scheme

###  You can access the free contraception scheme if you are:

  * A woman or person with a uterus 
  * Aged 17 to 35 
  * Living in Ireland 

###  What is included in the free contraception scheme?

  * Any GP appointments about your contraception options 
  * Contraception prescriptions from your doctor (at participating pharmacies) 
  * Emergency contraception (the morning-after-pill) 
  * Fitting, removal and check-ups of long-acting reversible contraception (LARCs) 
  * Other types of contraception such as contraceptive injections, implants, IUS and IUDs (coils), the contraceptive patch and contraceptive ring 
  * Prescriptions for combined oral contraception (the daily pill) 

Some products may not be on the HSE reimbursement list and will not be
provided free of charge.

###  How do I get free contraception if I am aged 17 to 35?

You do not need a medical card.

####  Book an appointment

Ask your GP if they have signed up to the [ Free Contraception Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/bc079-free-contraception-scheme/) and that
the service will be provided free of charge.

Your GP may refer you to another GP if they do not have expertise in fitting
certain forms of contraception.

Book an appointment with a GP or doctor to discuss your contraception. This
appointment will be free.

[ Read about what to expect at the doctor and questions you might ask the
doctor about your contraception ](https://sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/talking-about-contraception/talking-to-your-gp-or-
doctor/talking-to-your-gp-doctor.html) .

If you do not have a GP, do not want to go to a GP or your GP does not take
part in the Free Contraception Scheme, you can also get free contraception
from some family planning clinics, womenâ€™s health clinics, student health
clinics or health centres.

[ Search for a clinic offering free contraception
](http://search%20for%20a%20clinic%20offering%20free%20contraception/)

Freephone the HSE on 1800 700 700 to find a GP or clinic offering free
contraception.

####  At your appointment, you will need to provide your:

  * PPS number 
  * Name 
  * Date of birth 
  * Address 

Your information is used to let the pharmacy know not to charge you for your
free contraception prescription.

Freephone the HSE on 1800 700 700 to find a GP or clinic offering free
contraception.

[ Read more about the free contraception scheme for women aged 17 to 35.
](https://sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/contraception/free-contraception/)

##  Does the medical card cover contraception?

Yes. If you have a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) , you get free contraceptive drugs, devices and free GP
services including contraceptive advice. You can also get [ emergency
contraception ](https://sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/emergency-contraception/) with the medical card.

You will have to pay a [ prescription charge ](/en/health/drugs-and-
medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-holders/) for items you get
from pharmacies under the medical card scheme.

**If you do not have a medical card,** and you are not eligible for the free
contraception scheme (above), you will have to pay for contraception and
contraceptive services. You may be able to reduce the cost of your
contraception through the [ Drug Payment Scheme ](/en/health/drugs-and-
medicines/drugs-payment-scheme/) . For example, the cost of long-acting
reversible contraceptives such as the IUS (hormonal coil) or IUD (copper
coil). You may also be able to claim [ tax relief on medical expenses
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-
expenses/) .

##  Can I get free condoms in Ireland?

Using condoms every time you have sex will reduce your risk of contracting a [
Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/sexual-health/) .

###  You can get free condoms from:

  * [ Sexual health or GUM (genitourinary medicine) clinics ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-ireland.html)
  * Some [ sexual health NGOs ](https://spunout.ie/sex-relationships/contraception/free-condoms)
  * Many third level colleges 

You can also buy [ condoms ](/en/health/health-services/women-s-health/family-
planning-services#la235f) without a prescription from many supermarkets,
newsagents and pharmacies.

Condoms are not free under the medical card or free contraception scheme.

###  **If you think you might have an STI you should get tested**

Some STIs can cause serious health problems if left untreated. [ Free STI
testing is available in these hospitals
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-
ireland.html) . You can also [ order a free STI test to take at home.
](/en/health/health-services/women-s-health/sexual-health#l75768)

You can [ read more about Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/sexually-transmitted-
infections/) from the Department of Health website.

##  Emergency contraception

[ Emergency contraception ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/emergency-contraception/emergency-contraception/) is a
back-up contraception. You can use emergency contraception to stop an
unplanned pregnancy after you have had sex without using contraception, or if
your method of contraception has failed (for example, the condom slipped, or
you missed a pill).

You can choose [ different types of emergency contraception options
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/contraception/emergency-
contraception/your-emergency-contraception-choices/) depending on your
situation:

  * The emergency contraceptive pill (sometimes called the morning-after pill) which delays ovulation 
  * The copper coil (also known as post-coital IUD) which prevents sperm from joining an egg and can stop a fertilised egg from attaching to the uterus. 

The copper coil works even after ovulation has happened, unlike the emergency
contraception pill. The copper coil is the only form of contraception that
will be effective after you have already ovulated.

###  When can I use emergency contraception?

Depending on which emergency contraception you choose, you can use emergency
contraception up to 5 days after having unprotected sex, but it is more
effective the sooner you take it after unprotected sex.

###  Where can I get emergency contraception in Ireland?

You can get emergency contraception tablets over the counter in most
pharmacies without having to go to a doctor for a prescription.

You can get the copper coil fitted at a family planning clinic or at your GP
if they provide this service.

**You can get free emergency contraception if:**

  * You have a medical card, or 
  * You are a woman or person with a uterus, aged 17 to 35 and living in Ireland 

You can [ read about emergency contraception on the HSE website
sexualwellbeing.ie ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/emergency-contraception/emergency-contraception/) .

##  Unplanned pregnancy in Ireland

If you have an unplanned pregnancy and need support, the Health Service
Executive (HSE) has [ free confidential counselling and information services
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-pregnancy-support-services/find-a-
face-to-face-unplanned-pregnancy-counselling-service.html) to help you
consider your options and access the services that you need.

[ My Options is a HSE free phone line and webchat
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-pregnancy-support-services/my-
options-freephone-line.html) providing free and confidential information and
counselling for people experiencing unplanned pregnancy. This counselling and
information service is also available to you if your partner is going through
an unplanned pregnancy. You can read more about these services in our page on
[ unplanned pregnancy ](/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/unplanned-pregnancy/) .

You can read [ how to get an abortion on the HSE website
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/abortion/how-to-get/) .

[ Read about HSE supports if you choose to continue with your pregnancy
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/continued-pregnancy-supports/continued-
pregnancy-supports.html) .

##  More information on contraception

The HSE has a list of [ confidential counselling and contraception information
services ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/unplanned-pregnancy-support-
services/find-a-face-to-face-unplanned-pregnancy-counselling-service.html) and
an [ easy-to-read guide to contraception (pdf)
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/contraception/plain-english-
guide-final.pdf) .

You can [ read contraception information in different languages on this HSE
website ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-
health/contraception/resources/) .

###  My Options

HSE

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday: 9am to 8pm Saturday: 10am to 2pm

**Tel:** Outside the Republic of Ireland: +353 59 913 8175

**Locall:** 1800 828 010

**Homepage:** [ https://www.myoptions.ie ](https://www.myoptions.ie)

###  Sexualwellbeing.ie

HSE Sexual Health and Crisis Pregnancy Programme

**Homepage:** [ https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/
](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/)

###  Spunout.ie

**Homepage:** [ https://spunout.ie/category/sex-relationships/contraception
](https://spunout.ie/category/sex-relationships/contraception)

_**Page edited:** 9 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/contraception/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Contraception&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/contraception/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/contraception/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Contraception&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/reproductive_health/contraception/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _About Citizens Information_ ](/en/about/citizens-information-about/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland.

792.76605

  * [ _Youth Information Centres and Services_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/)

Youth Information Centres and Services provide free, confidential information
for young people and for people who work with young people.

772.03033

  * [ _Tracing your birth information and birth family_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/tracing-your-birth-family/)

Find out how to access your birth information or trace your birth family if
you were adopted in Ireland.

567.3142

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

