**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Planning
permission ](/en/housing/planning-permission/) > Planning permission for
building a house

#  Planning permission for building a house

  * Introduction 
  * What to consider before applying for planning permission 
  * How to apply for planning permission 
  * How much does it cost to apply 
  * How long does it take? 
  * Can I appeal? 

##  Introduction

If you are planning to build a house, you must first get planning permission
from your local authority. This is required by law for almost every
development.

It is illegal to carry out any work if you don’t have the required planning
permission. You may be fined and possibly imprisoned if you build without the
required planning permission.

However, if a genuine mistake has been made, you can apply for planning
permission to keep an unauthorised structure in place, but this permission is
not guaranteed. If permission is refused after the building is complete, you
will have to demolish the unauthorised structure.

##  What to consider before applying for planning permission

Before you apply for planning permission, there any many things to consider,
such as what type of planning permission you’ll need and if your plans fit
with the development plan for your area.

**Types of planning permission**

You need to apply for planning permission for most developments on your land
or property.

This includes most:

  * Building and demolition work 
  * Alterations to land or buildings 
  * Significant changes to the use of land or buildings 

However, you may not need [ planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-permission/) for smaller developments and minor changes to
your home. For example, you do not need planning permission for small
extensions or when converting your garage or shed. There are [ specific
conditions ](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission-for-altering-
a-house/) for these exemptions.

There are two different types of [ planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-permission/) :

  * **Permission:** This is when the local authority agrees to your work. It lasts for 5 years. 
  * **Outline permission:** This is when you have an initial plan and want to see if the local authority agrees to it in principle. 

The local authority may grant permission with conditions. This means you may
have to make changes to your designs in order to get approval.

**Planning permission to clear a site**

If you need to clear a site before building can begin building, you will need
planning permission to:

  * Make or widen an access onto a public road 
  * Demolish a structure that was last used as a home 
  * Demolish a building in a terrace 
  * Demolish a building that is attached to another building not owned by you 
  * Demolish a protected structure 

**Your local authority's local development plan**

Always review your [ local development plan ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/development-plans/) before you apply for planning permission. A
development plan describes how your local authority plans to develop
particular parts of the local authority area where you live (for example,
residential areas, industrial areas, agricultural areas).

Your local authority can tell you if your plans are likely to fit-in with the
[ local development plan ](/en/housing/planning-permission/development-plans/)
. You can discuss your plans with them and they can advise you on the planning
permission process and any particular conditions for building in the area.

For example, you can only build a home in some rural areas, if you have an
association with the area. This is known as local needs. The local authority
will be able to advise you on these conditions.

**Do your research with the Office of the Planning Regulator**

The [ Office of the Planning Regulator ](https://www.opr.ie/) publishes very
helpful information in:

  * [ Doing Work around the House – The Planning Issues (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-8-A-Guide-to-Doing-Work-Around-the-House.pdf)
  * [ A Guide to Planning Permission (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-3-A-Guide-to-Planning-Permission.pdf)
  * [ A Guide to Making a Planning Application (pdf) ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-4-A-Guide-to-Making-a-Planning-Application.pdf)

For more information on applying for planning permission and the different
types of planning permission, see [ Planning permission
](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission/) .

##  How to apply for planning permission

There are two basic steps.

**1: Notify the public about your plans**

You must notify the public about your plans before you apply for planning
permission:

  * Place a notice in a local newspaper (your local authority can provide a list for your area) 
  * Put up a site notice which is visible and easily read 

The site notice must be put up on or before the day you apply and remain there
for at least 5 weeks.

**Days over Christmas holiday period don’t count:** The 9 days over Christmas,
from 24 December to 1 January, are not considered when calculating the 5-week
period.

The OPR’s [ Guide to Making a Planning Application ](https://www.opr.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/Planning-Leaflet-4-A-Guide-to-Making-a-Planning-
Application.pdf) has information about what to include in the notices.

**2\. Send in your application to the local authority**

Fill in a planning application form and submit it with the relevant documents
to your local authority.

Application forms are available from [ your local authority.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/)

Your planning application must be received by the local authority within 2
weeks of the notice appearing in the newspaper.

Your planning permission is valid for 5 years after it is granted.

##  How much does it cost to apply

When you submit your planning application to your local authority, you must
pay an application fee. It is €65 for an application to build a house.

But remember, you may also have to pay for the notice to appear in the
newspaper.

##  How long does it take?

Your local authority must make a decision on your planning application within
8 weeks of receiving it. They can:

  * Grant permission 
  * Refuse permission 
  * Request further information 
  * Extend the time period with your agreement 

##  Can I appeal?

If the local authority refuses your application, they will give you the
reasons for their decision. You then have one month to [ appeal this decision
](/en/housing/planning-permission/appealing-planning-permission-decision/) to
[ An Bord Pleanála ](http://www.pleanala.ie/) .

You must not start building before you are granted planning permission.

_**Page edited:** 15 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-for-building-a-house/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Planning%20permission%20for%20building%20a%20house&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-for-building-a-house/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-for-building-a-house/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Planning%20permission%20for%20building%20a%20house&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/planning-for-building-a-house/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Planning permission for altering your house_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission-for-altering-a-house/)

Details the plannning requirements if extending a house, converting a house,
or changing the use of a building.

2172.8809

  * [ _How to appeal a planning permission decision_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/appealing-planning-permission-decision/)

Outlines the circumstances in which you can appeal a planning decision and how
to make an appeal.

1756.7037

  * [ _Planning permission_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission/)

Introduction to the different types of planning permission as well as how and
where to apply for planning permission.

1379.5259

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

