**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Renting a
home ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/) > [ Landlords' rights and responsibilities
](/en/housing/renting-a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/) > Rent
increases in private rented housing

#  Rent increases in private rented housing

  * Introduction 
  * Rent increases in Rent Pressure Zones 
  * Rent Pressure Zones 
  * Rent increases outside Rent Pressure Zones 
  * Rent reviews 
  * If your landlord is raising the rent 
  * Disputes about rent increases 
  * Useful contacts 

##  Introduction

The amount of rent you pay for a property is agreed between the landlord and
tenant at the start of a tenancy. Private landlords must follow certain
procedures if they want to raise the rent. The rules are set out in [
residential tenancies legislation
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2004/act/27/front/revised/en/html) .

These rules about rent increases apply to private rented housing. They do not
apply to housing let by [ local authorities ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-
social-housing/) or [ approved housing bodies ](/en/housing/local-authority-
and-social-housing/approved-housing-bodies/) , as they charge differential
rents based on household income. While approved housing bodies come under the
residential tenancies legislation, their rent reviews are carried out in
accordance with their tenancy agreements, or no more than once in any 12-month
period.

Student-specific accommodation comes under the remit of the [ Residential
Tenancies Board (RTB) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/residential-tenancies-board/) . This means that student tenancies are
covered by residential tenancies legislation and these tenants have most of
the same rights as private tenants, including that their landlords must follow
the rules about increasing the rent.

##  Rent increases in Rent Pressure Zones

Rent Pressure Zones (RPZs) are areas where rents are highest and rising
quickly. An area must meet [ certain criteria ](https://www.rtb.ie/rent-
pressure-zones) to become an RPZ. In these areas, annual rent increases are
capped.

RPZs were introduced on 24 December 2016. They were to remain in place until
31 December 2024. But, on 14 May 2024, [ the Government agreed to extend them
until 31 December 2025
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/debates/debate/dail/2024-05-14/2/#:~:text=Today%2C%20the%20Government%20decided%20to,being%20made%20for%20many%20homeowners)
.

[ See below for the list of areas that are Rent Pressure Zones
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/rent-
increases/#86db0f) .

###  How are rent increases in RPZs calculated?

The system for calculating allowable rent increases in RPZs has changed a
number of times.

Since, 11 December 2021, annual rent increases in RPZs are capped in line with
the rate of general inflation or 2% a year, **whichever is lower** . So, if
your landlord reviews the rent every 12 months and the rate of general
inflation is 1.5%, then your rent can only be increased by a maximum of 1.5%.
However, if the rate of general inflation is higher than 2%, for example, 3%,
the rent can only be increased by a maximum of 2%.

If your landlord has not reviewed the rent for a number of years, the 2% cap
applies every year. So, for example, if you moved into rented accommodation in
December 2016 and the rent hasn’t changed since then, the general inflation
rate would apply when calculating the rent increase. This is because the
inflation rate between December 2016 and December 2021 was 6.6%, which is
lower than the 10% that would apply under the 2% per year condition (2% per
year for 5 years = 10%). The [ RTB’s Rent Pressure Zone calculator
](https://www.rtb.ie/calculator/rpz) applies both of these conditions and
calculates the allowable rent increase for you.

From 16 July 2021 to 10 December 2021, annual rent increases in RPZs were only
capped at the rate of general inflation, as set out in the [ Harmonised
Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) ](https://www.rtb.ie/calculator/hicp-index)
. But, due to rising inflation these rules were changed to include the new 2%
per year condition. This was introduced under the [ Residential Tenancies
(Amendment) (No. 2) Act 2021
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2021/145/) . The RTB has published a
[ guidance document (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/Comms%20and%20Research/Government_Guidance_Residential_Tenancies_\(Amendment\)_Act_2021_V2_13_Dec_21.pdf)
highlighting the changes this legislation brought in and what they mean for
landlords and tenants.

Between 24 December 2016 and 15 July 2021 rent increases in RPZs were capped
at 4% per year.

The RTB has [ general information about RPZs, as well as detail on the
Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) ](https://www.rtb.ie/rent-
pressure-zones) , and how it relates to RPZs.

##  Rent Pressure Zones

The following local authority areas and local electoral areas (LEAs) were
designated Rent Pressure Zones when they matched the RPZ criteria on the dates
below:

**30 November 2023**

  * Shannon LEA, Co Clare 
  * Westmeath County Council 

**31 August 2023**

  * Ennis LEA, Co Clare 
  * Kilkenny County Council 
  * Limerick City and County Council 
  * Waterford City and County Council 

**28 June 2023**

  * Westport LEA, Co Mayo 

**29 September 2020**

  * Kildare County Council 

**16 July 2020**

  * Bandon - Kinsale LEA, Co Cork 

**22 April 2020**

  * Mallow LEA, Co Cork 
  * Killarney LEA, Co Kerry 
  * Athy LEA, Co Kildare 
  * Tullamore LEA, Co Offaly 
  * Mullingar LEA, Co Westmeath 

**18 December 2019**

  * Cobh LEA, Co Cork 
  * Piltown LEA, Co Kilkenny 
  * Sligo-Strandhill LEA, Co Sligo 
  * Baltinglass LEA, Co Wicklow 

**26 September 2019**

  * Carlow LEA, Co Carlow 
  * Macroom LEA, Co Cork 

**2 July 2019**

  * Fermoy LEA, Co Cork 
  * Midleton LEA, Co Cork 
  * Athenry-Oranmore LEA, Co Galway 
  * Gort-Kinvara LEA, Co Galway 
  * Kilkenny LEA, Co Kilkenny 
  * Portlaoise LEA, Co Laois 
  * Graiguecullen-Portarlington LEA, Co Laois 
  * Limerick City West LEA, Co Limerick 
  * Limerick City North LEA, Co Limerick 
  * Dundalk-Carlingford LEA, Co Louth 
  * Dundalk South LEA, Co Louth 
  * Ardee LEA, Co Louth 
  * Kells LEA, Co Meath 
  * Trim LEA, Co Meath 
  * Waterford City South LEA, Co Waterford 
  * Waterford City East LEA, Co Waterford 
  * Athlone LEA, Co Westmeath 
  * Gorey LEA, Co Wexford 
  * Arklow LEA, Co Wicklow 

**28 March 2019**

  * Navan LEA, Co Meath 
  * Limerick City East LEA, Co Limerick 

**22 September 2017**

  * Greystones LEA, Co Wicklow 
  * Drogheda LEA, Co Louth 

**24 March 2017**

  * Cobh LEA, Co Cork 
  * Maynooth LEA, Co Kildare 

**27 January 2017**

  * Ballincollig–Carrigaline LEA, Co Cork 
  * Galway City Central LEA, Co Galway 
  * Galway City East LEA, Co Galway 
  * Galway City West LEA, Co Galway 
  * Naas LEA, Co Kildare 
  * Newbridge LEA, Co Kildare 
  * Celbridge-Leixlip LEA, Co Kildare 
  * Ashbourne LEA, Co Meath 
  * Laytown-Bettystown LEA, Co Meath 
  * Ratoath LEA, Co Meath 
  * Bray LEA, Co Wicklow 
  * Wicklow LEA, Co Wicklow 

**24 December 2016**

  * Dublin City Council 
  * South Dublin County Council 
  * Dun Laoghaire/Rathdown County Council 
  * Fingal County Council 
  * Cork City Council 

There is more information about [ Rent Pressure Zones and other measures on
rtb.ie ](https://www.rtb.ie/rent-pressure-zones) .

##  Rent increases outside Rent Pressure Zones

Under [ the Residential Tenancies Act 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2004/en/act/pub/0027/sec0019.html#sec19) ,
landlords cannot charge more than the open market rate of rent. _Market rent_
(for properties outside Rent Pressure Zones) is defined as ‘the rent which a
willing tenant not already in occupation would give and a willing landlord
would take for the dwelling’. The RTB publishes a quarterly [ index of rents
](https://www.rtb.ie/news/rtb-publishes-q1-2022-rent-index) , which you can
use to check current market rents. Read [ more about market rent and the rent
index ](https://www.rtb.ie/beginning-a-tenancy/comparable-market-rents) .

##  Rent reviews

A tenant or a landlord can request a rent review. A rent review can result in
an increase or reduction in the rent. Rent Pressure Zones and areas outside
Rent Pressure Zones have different rules for rent reviews.

###  **Rent reviews in Rent Pressure Zones**

Rent increases in [ Rent Pressure Zones ](https://www.rtb.ie/rent-pressure-
zones) are capped and there are limits on how often the rent can be reviewed.
There are different rules about the limits and frequency of rent reviews
depending on if the tenancy in the Rent Pressure Zone is an existing or new
tenancy.

####  **Rent reviews for a new tenancy in an RPZ**

For a new tenancy in a Rent Pressure Zone, the landlord can review the rent
once every 12 months. The landlord must give the tenant the following
information, in writing, at the start of the tenancy:

  * The amount of rent that was last set for the property 
  * The date the rent was last set for the property 
  * A statement as to how the rent set for the property has been calculated, having regard to the Rent Pressure Zone calculator 

The rent being set should not be more than local market rents for similar
properties

####  Rent reviews for an existing tenancy in an RPZ

If a tenancy is already in existence when an area becomes a Rent Pressure
Zone, the first rent review can take place 24 months after either of the
following:

  * The start of the tenancy 
  * The date you were notified in writing of your last review 

Subsequent rent reviews can take place after 12 months and must adhere to the
RPZ rules.

####  **Exceptions to rent limits in an RPZ**

There are 3 exceptions to the rent limits applied in Rent Pressure Zones:

  1. Properties that have not been let at any time in the previous 2 years 
  2. Properties in protected structures or proposed protected structures that have not been let in the previous year 
  3. Properties that have been substantially changed. (A ‘substantial change’ in this situation is defined in the Residential Tenancies (Amendment) Act 2019. The RTB website has details of the types of [ substantial change ](https://www.rtb.ie/news/important-new-changes-to-legislation-affecting-the-rental-sector) required). 

Even if a property qualifies for one of these exemptions, the new rent set
must still be in line with market rent for similar properties in the area.

If a landlord wants to get an exemption from rent limits in an RPZ area, they
must notify the RTB within 1 month of setting the rent by completing the [
RTB’s RPZ Exemption Form (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/forms/Schedule_2_RPZ_Exemption_Form_RTB_%28Revised_Dec_2021%29_Final.pdf)
.

The RTB can [ investigate and sanction ](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-
compliance/investigations-sanctions) landlords who do not comply with RPZ
rules. There are penalties for landlords who do not follow rent increase
limits in RPZs, provide false information about an exemption in an RPZ area or
do not notify the RTB about availing of an exemption.

###  **Rent reviews outside of Rent Pressure Zones**

Your rent cannot be reviewed until 24 months after the start of your tenancy.
If your rent was reviewed at any time in the last 24 months, it cannot be
reviewed again until 24 months after the date of the last review. This rent
certainty measure is in place until 31 December 2024.

When the 24-month period is over your landlord must give you at least 90 days’
notice of a change in rent. This written notice must state the amount of the
new rent and date the new rent will take effect.

Your landlord cannot charge more than 'market rent' which is the going rate
for your type of accommodation in the area you live.

###  Calculating allowable rent increases

You can use [ the RTB’s calculator ](https://www.rtb.ie/calculator/rpz) to
check if your property is in a Rent Pressure Zone and to work out if the rent
can be raised and, if so, by how much. You will need to enter your address or
[ Eircode ](/en/consumer/phone-internet-tv-and-postal-services/eircode/) , the
current rent and the date when the rent was last set.

###  Notice of rent review

Once the required period (12 or 24 months) has elapsed, your landlord can
issue a notice of rent review.

The landlord must give you proper notice of the amount of the proposed new
rent and the date from which it is to take effect. Landlords must use the [
RTB’s Notice of Rent Review Form (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/forms/Schedule_1_Notice_of_New_Rent_RTB_%28Revised_Dec_2021%29_Final_%282%29.pdf)
when issuing a rent review. Landlords should fill out the sections of the form
that are relevant to them and should not delete or change any of the form.
Other forms, emails, text messages and spoken messages are not valid forms of
notice.

You must get at least 90 days’ notice of a rent review. This means that the
new rent cannot apply until 90 days after the notice has been issued.

The landlord must also notify the RTB of the revised rent so that it can
update the registration details of the tenancy. The landlord can do this
online using the [ RTB’s online account system ](https://www.rtb.ie/portal) ,
or by completing the RTB’s [ Tenancy Update Form (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/forms/Upload_-
_RTB_form_Tenancy_Update_\(s139\)_30.03.2022.pdf) and returning it to the RTB.
The form can be emailed to [ registrations@rtb.ie
](mailto:registrations@rtb.ie) , or posted to the RTB. There is no fee for
updating this information with the RTB. The [ RTB’s website has more
information about updating your tenancy details ](https://www.rtb.ie/register-
a-tenancy/update-a-tenancy-registration) .

###  Tenants requesting a rent review

As a tenant, you can ask your landlord to review the rent if:

  * You think it is more than the current market rate for the property or 
  * You want a new review and more than 24 months have passed [ https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/setting-and-reviewing-rent/rent-pressure-zones-setting-rent-and-rent-reviews#Exemptions%20to%20the%20Rent%20Pressure%20Zone%20rental%20cap ](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/setting-and-reviewing-rent/rent-pressure-zones-setting-rent-and-rent-reviews#Exemptions%20to%20the%20Rent%20Pressure%20Zone%20rental%20cap)

##  If your landlord is raising the rent

Threshold, the national housing charity, publishes detailed advice on [ how to
deal with rent increases ](http://www.threshold.ie/advice/dealing-with-
problems-during-your-tenancy/how-to-deal-with-rent-increases/) . You can
contact Threshold for advice on your particular situation – see ‘Where to
apply’ below’.

If there is any dispute about the amount of rent being proposed, either side
can [ refer the dispute to the RTB ](https://www.rtb.ie/dispute-resolution) .
If you are claiming that the proposed rent is higher than the market rate, you
should provide evidence of rental rates for similar properties in the same
area.

If the landlord has given you a valid written notice of the rent increase, you
must contact the RTB with your dispute before the date that the new rent comes
into effect or within 28 days of getting the notice, whichever is later. There
is no time limit if the notice is not valid.

You must continue to pay your rent until the case has been determined by the
RTB.

###  Protecting your tenancy

You can contact Threshold’s [ Tenancy Protection Service
](http://www.threshold.ie/housing-supports/dublin.html) on 1800 454 454 for
general support, advice and advocacy around protecting your tenancy.

If you are getting (or applying for) [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) , there may be
flexibility in cases where landlords seek rents that are above the Rent
Supplement limits. This applies to existing tenants and to new Rent Supplement
applicants. The circumstances of tenants are considered on a case-by-case
basis and rents increased above the set limits as appropriate. Contact [ the
local office that administers your Rent Supplement
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/service/40cf48-find-your-local-intreo-
office/) . The Tenancy Protection Service can help you in making an
application.

The Department of Social Protection, in conjunction with Threshold, operates a
special protocol for tenants on Rent Supplement in areas where supply issues
are particularly acute - Dublin, Kildare, Meath, Wicklow, Cork city and
environs, Galway, Mayo and Roscommon. Contact the [ Tenancy Protection Service
](http://www.threshold.ie/housing-supports/dublin.html) on 1800 454 454.

##  Disputes about rent increases

The RTB deals with disputes between landlords and tenants about rent
increases. There are 2 stages to the RTB’s dispute resolution process. Stage 1
is confidential mediation or adjudication, and Stage 2 is an appeal of the
mediator’s or adjudicator’s decision, which is a public hearing by a 3-person
Tenancy Tribunal. For more information see our document [ resolving disputes
between landlords and tenants ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/) .

The RTB can also investigate and sanction landlords who do not comply with RPZ
rules. See the [ RTB’s website ](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-
compliance/investigations-sanctions) for more information about what can be
investigated and how to make a complaint.

##  Useful contacts

###  Threshold

21 Stoneybatter  
Dublin 7  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Mon-Fri 9.30 am - 5 pm

**Tel:** 1800 454 454

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advice@threshold.ie ](mailto:advice@threshold.ie)

###  Threshold

Dublin Outreach Clinic  
Co. Council Office  
Grove Road  
Blanchardstown  
Co. Dublin

**Opening Hours:** Tuesday 2pm - 5pm

**Tel:** (01) 635 3651

###  Threshold

22 South Mall  
Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Mon - Fri: 9 am to 1 pm and 2 pm to 5 pm

**Tel:** (021) 427 8848

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advicecork@threshold.ie ](mailto:advicecork@threshold.ie)

###  Threshold

5 Prospect Hill  
Galway  
Ireland  
H91 HC1H

**Opening Hours:** Mon-Fri 9.30 am - 5 pm

**Tel:** (091) 563 080

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ advicegalway@threshold.ie ](mailto:advicegalway@threshold.ie)

###  Tenancy Protection Service (Threshold)

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 9am to 9pm

**Locall:** 1800 454 454

**Homepage:** [ http://www.threshold.ie ](http://www.threshold.ie)

**Email:** [ tps@threshold.ie ](mailto:tps@threshold.ie)

###  Residential Tenancies Board

PO Box 47  
Clonakilty  
Co. Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 9am to 5pm

**Tel:** 0818 303 037 or 01 702 8100

**Fax:** 0818 303 039

**Homepage:** [ http://www.rtb.ie/ ](http://www.rtb.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 15 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-increases-in-private-rented-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rent%20increases%20in%20private%20rented%20housing&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-increases-in-private-rented-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-increases-in-private-rented-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Rent%20increases%20in%20private%20rented%20housing&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-
a-home/landlords-rights-and-responsibilities/rent-increases-in-private-rented-
housing/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Repossession of rented social housing_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/repossession-of-rented-social-housing/)

The procedures that local authorities must follow before repossessing a rented
dwelling.

1570.6519

  * [ _Minimum standards for rented housing_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/minimum-standards-for-rented-homes/)

Landlords are legally obliged to ensure that their properties comply with
minimum physical standards.

1487.2739

  * [ _Tenants' rights to stay in rented accommodation_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/types-of-tenancy/)

Security of tenure is a tenant’s right to stay in rented accommodation for a
set amount of time.

1173.3402

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

