**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Mental health ](/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/) > Mental health professionals

#  Mental health professionals

  * Information 
  * Doctors 
  * Psychologists 
  * Therapists 
  * Counsellor 
  * Other mental health professionals 
  * Do I have to pay for mental health services? 
  * How to find a mental health professional 

##  Information

Mental health services use a multidisciplinary approach, which means that a
number of different types of healthcare professionals offer their skills in a
co-ordinated and complementary way. This page describes mental health
professionals and what they do.

Read more about [ mental health services ](/en/health/health-services/mental-
health/mental-health-services/) in Ireland on our website.

Access [ support from the HSE ](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/) for your
mental health.

##  Doctors

###  Family doctor (GP)

Your GP is often the first person you will seek help from. They will assess
the problem and may if necessary:

  * Provide medication and monitor your condition, or 
  * Refer you to a specialist, for example, psychiatrist, psychologist or counsellor 

###  Psychiatrist

A psychiatrist is a medical doctor that specialises in mental health.
Psychiatrists are responsible for the medical care of psychiatric patients and
can help you with your mental health using medication and counselling.

A psychiatrist usually works in a psychiatric hospital or unit or as part of a
community care team but can also be part of a private practice.

In most cases, your GP will refer you to a psychiatrist if they think it is
necessary or if you ask for a referral.

A psychiatrist will assess you to decide on the best treatment. This may
involve treatment with medication or referral to a member of the mental health
team. If a psychiatrist thinks it necessary, they may suggest that you be
admitted to hospital.

##  Psychologists

###  Psychologist

A psychologist is trained in the study of human behaviour and tries to explain
feelings, thoughts and behaviour.

Psychologists can assess and treat a wide range of psychological problems such
as anxiety and depression. They can also help you examine the effects your
illness is having on your life and ways you can cope with those effects. A
psychologist will try to bring you closer to understanding your illness.

Within mental health, the psychologist usually works as a clinical, community
or counselling psychologist. They do not prescribe medication unless they are
also medically qualified.

The psychologist works in different ways such as group work, telephone
consultations or one-to-one consultations.

###  Clinical psychologist

A clinical psychologist has a specialist qualification in mental health and
works as part of the mental health team in a unit or hospital and are involved
in assessment and counselling therapy.

A clinical psychologist may offer you family therapy, or a particular approach
may be used for specific problems. For example, if you have a phobia, [
cognitive-behavioural approach
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/4/mental-health-
services/dsc/communityservices/cbt.html) therapy may be used. Referral is
often through a GP or psychiatrist, but you may also self-refer.

###  Community psychologist

A community psychologist has a clinical qualification and works as part of a
community-based team with professionals such as social workers, speech
therapists and community welfare officers.

The community psychologist assesses and works with patients with a wide range
of problems, including children with behavioural, educational and other
difficulties.

###  Counselling psychologist

Counselling psychology, includes a broad range of methods that can help you
improve their well-being, alleviate distress and maladjustment, resolve
crises, and increase their ability to live more highly functioning lives.

Counselling psychologists work in many places such as, schools and colleges,
industrial workplaces and health services.

##  Therapists

###  Psychotherapist

Psychotherapy can be more in-depth than other forms of therapy. It suggests
that the less aware you are of your motives, feelings and actions, the more
they control you and the more you stay stuck in old patterns that may be
harmful to you.

A psychotherapist can help you examine your subconscious thoughts. By making
you aware of your unconscious motives, fears and feelings and dealing with
them in order to get relief from your symptoms. Psychotherapists usually
follow a long postgraduate training during which trainees must undergoing
therapy.

###  Behavioural therapist

Behavioural therapy is based on the idea you can change what people do by
teaching them to respond to things in a different way.

Behavioural therapy helps you control undesirable habits or irrational fears
(phobias) and can be used in treating behavioural conditions such as eating
disorders.

In many cases, behaviours can be learned or unlearned through basic
conditioning techniques including:

  * Aversive conditioning - unwanted habits are paired with unpleasant stimuli 
  * Systematic desensitisation - a stimulus that causes anxiety is paired with a pleasant one. 

Some behavioural therapists may also be psychiatrists, psychologists,
psychiatric nurses or social workers who have been trained to work in this
area. While this therapy is often used to treat behaviour disorders, it may
not be available in all regions.

###  Cognitive behavioural therapist

Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) aims to reduce mental health problems, and
behaviour by changing your behaviour and thinking patterns.

CBT professionals believe that changes in thinking can reduce distress and
bring about a change in symptoms and behaviour. This change can happen by

  * Practicing new behaviours, and 
  * Analysing thinking patterns. 

Cognitive behavioural therapists may not all be psychologists or
psychiatrists. You should check with your [ HSE Local Health Office
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/lho/) to see if the service is
available in your area.

###

##  Counsellor

There are different forms of counselling for a wide range of problems and many
counsellors specialise in areas such as [ addiction ](/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-services/) or [
bereavement ](/en/death/bereavement-counselling-and-support/) .

Counsellors do not judge you but attentively listen and respect you as the
client. Counselling aims to help you take control of your own life. You can
usually self-refer to counselling, although a GP, psychiatrist or trusted
friend may be able to recommend someone suitable.

Some counsellors are qualified psychologists, but many are not. Those who are
not may have a basic degree or training in other areas and/or relevant work
experience (for example, teaching or nursing) plus a counselling
qualification. These qualifications can vary from Master's degrees to short-
term courses.

It is important to make sure you are happy with the training and
qualifications of any counsellor that you choose. Counselling is often one
session per week and can continue for a specific number of sessions or last
longer, although this can vary.

###  Addiction counsellor

Addiction counsellors provide assessment, counselling, information and [
addiction treatment services
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/alcohol-and-
drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-services/) for people suffering from
alcohol, drugs and gambling addictions.

Before getting counselling for addiction, you must go through a detoxification
programme, if necessary. You are then referred to the community-based
addiction treatment service.

Individual and group counselling is often used, focusing on the consequences
of your behaviour caused by the addiction. The main part of the treatment
examines the triggering factors that lead to the development of the addiction.

Target goals are set to try and establish new patterns of healthy behaviour.
An important part of the treatment is to involve a family member, who can help
you achieve these targets. Addiction counselling lasts for an average of 6 to
8 weeks and is followed by an after-care service.

Read more about [ addiction treatment services
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/alcohol-and-
drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-services/) on our website.

The HSE have [ information on how to give up or cut down if alcohol or drugs
](https://www2.hse.ie/living-well/alcohol/self-help/)

You can also [ get support for changing your alcohol or drug use
](https://www2.hse.ie/living-well/alcohol/self-help/get-support/) on the HSE
website.

##  Other mental health professionals

###  Psychiatric nurse

A psychiatric nurse plays a central role in the care of the psychiatric
patient, both in a hospital setting and in the community.

They work within a psychiatric service as part of a health care team. They
provide you with physical and psychological care and can also provide
essential support and encouragement to your family. The psychiatric nurse's
activities can include:

  * Providing day patient care 
  * Organising detoxification programmes 
  * Educating student nurses and community groups 
  * Supporting and educating your family 
  * Providing group therapies, individual counselling 
  * Liaising with in-patient services, GPs, strategy and voluntary organisations 
  * Organising admissions to hospital and reception 
  * Making initial assessment of referrals from GPs 

The community psychiatric nurse usually keeps contact with patients after they
are discharged from hospital by calling to their homes and attending out-
patients' clinics and day care centres.

###  Mental health social worker

Mental health social workers work as part of a team to provide counselling,
information and coping strategies. Mental health social workers help to
coordinate different services including health services, housing, social
welfare and employment services.

###  Occupational therapist

[ Occupational therapists
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-
community/occupational-therapy-services/) provide services if you have
difficulty coping with everyday activities due to physical, psychological or
developmental problems.

Occupational therapy aims to help you be as independent as possible. Treatment
can include:

  * Self-care 
  * Personal development 
  * Mobility and access 
  * Skills and training 
  * Home management 
  * Work preparation 
  * Stress management. 

Find out more about [ occupational therapy for mental health
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/services-support/occupational-therapy/) on
the HSE website.

###  Vocational supports trainer

Vocational training provides skills, knowledge and attitudes to help you start
work, further training, education and self-employment.

You can usually be referred through a professional such as a psychiatrist, but
you can also self-refer.

Some trainers are mental health professionals, such as psychiatric nurses, but
others may not have specific medical training.

You can find out more about the [ Vocational Training Opportunities Scheme
](/en/education/further-education-and-training/vocational-training-
opportunities-scheme/) on our website.

##  Do I have to pay for mental health services?

You do not have to pay to use the services of mental health professionals who
work in the public health system.

If you decide to use private mental health services, the cost will vary. You
should check with the health professional for more details.

##  How to find a mental health professional

Contact your GP to access to mental health professionals, both public and
private. Some private counsellors, psychologists, etc. can be approached
directly without a referral.

Find out more about [ accessing mental health services ](/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-services/) .

Get [ mental health supports on the HSE website. ](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-
health/services-support/)

You can find more about your [ rights as a psychiatric patient
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/mental-
health/rights-of-psychiatric-patients/) .

_**Page edited:** 26 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Mental%20health%20professionals&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Mental%20health%20professionals&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/mental-health/mental-health-
professionals/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Overview of mental health and mental illness_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-and-mental-illness/)

An overview of the mental health category including links to documents on
mental health services, community care, and the Mental Health Act 2001.

1732.2593

  * [ _Registration of health and social care professionals_ ](/en/health/health-system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/)

Health and social care professionals are regulated by CORU. There is a process
for making complaints about the fitness to practice of registered
professionals.

1638.4423

  * [ _Inspector of Mental Health Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/inspector-of-mental-health-services/)

This document describes the Inspector of Mental Health Services who is
appointed under the Mental Health Act 2001.

1611.6951

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

