**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health system
](/en/health/health-system/) > Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS)

#  Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS)

  * What is the Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS)? 
  * What services are covered by the PCRS scheme? 
  * How do healthcare providers get paid for their services? 
  * Contact information 

##  What is the Primary Care Reimbursement Service (PCRS)?

The [ Primary Care Reimbursement Service ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/staff/pcrs/)
(PCRS) pays the doctors, pharmacists, dentists and opticians who provide
public healthcare services. The Health Service Executive (HSE) manages the
PCRS.

##  What services are covered by the PCRS scheme?

The PCRS scheme includes almost all publicly funded healthcare services in the
community, including:

  * [ Medical card services ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) provided by doctors and pharmacists 
  * [ Prescribed drugs and medicines ](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/prescribed-drugs-and-medicines/) services provided by community pharmacists 
  * [ Dental services ](/en/health/health-services/dental-aural-and-optical-services/dental-services/) for medical card holders 
  * [ Opthalmic services ](/en/health/health-services/dental-aural-and-optical-services/sight-tests-and-eye-health/) for medical card holders 

The PCRS also issues [ Annual Reports ](https://www.sspcrs.ie/portal/annual-
reporting/report/annual) with information and statistics on all the primary
care services it supports. You can see up-to-date data about these services on
the [ PCRS Reporting and Open Data Web Portal
](https://www.sspcrs.ie/portal/annual-reporting) .

##  How do healthcare providers get paid for their services?

When doctors, pharmacists, dentists and opticians provide healthcare services
for the Health Service Executive (HSE), the HSE uses the PCRS to pay them. How
much they are paid, and other conditions of service are negotiated by the
Department of Health and the relevant professional bodies.

##  Contact information

###  HSE Primary Care Reimbursement Service

Exit 5 M50  
North Road  
Finglas  
Dublin 11  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 864 7100

**Fax:** (01) 834 3589

**Email:** [ ClientRegistration@hse.ie ](mailto:ClientRegistration@hse.ie)

_**Page edited:** 5 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/general-medical-services-payments-
board/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Primary%20Care%20Reimbursement%20Service%20%28PCRS%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/general-medical-services-payments-
board/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/general-medical-services-payments-
board/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Primary%20Care%20Reimbursement%20Service%20%28PCRS%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/general-medical-services-payments-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Payments to carers_ ](/en/social-welfare/carers/payments-to-carers/)

Find out about the different payments and benefits for carers.

1410.9067

  * [ _Chiropody, podiatry and foot care services_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/chiropody-services/)

Chiropodists/podiatrists assess, diagnose and treat diseases and abnormalities
of the foot. Some Local Health Offices provide chiropody services to certain
eligible people.

1384.0359

  * [ _Community care services_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/community-care-services/)

Public health services in Ireland delivered in the community are called
community care services. Overview of services and links to other sections of
this site.

1376.9751

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

