**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Losing your
home and homelessness ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/) >
Homelessness and the right to housing

#  Homelessness and the right to housing

  * What is homelessness? 
  * The right to housing 
  * Who is responsible for housing homeless people? 
  * Housing policy 
  * Who monitors homelessness levels? 
  * Further information 

##  What is homelessness?

There are many different reasons why people become homeless. Perhaps you have
lost your rented accommodation, or had to move out of your home because your
relationship has broken down. You may be staying with family or couch surfing
with friends. Or you may be homeless for more complex reasons and have
additional needs due to addiction or mental health issues.

**What is the definition of homelessness?**

You are considered homeless if one of the following applies to you:

  * There is no accommodation available that you and any other person who normally lives with you, can reasonably stay in. This is in your local authority's opinion. 
  * You are living in a hospital, county home, night shelter or other such institution, and you are living there because you have no suitable accommodation 
  * You are unable to provide accommodation from your own resources. This is in your local authority's opinion. 

This definition of homelessness is outlined in the [ Housing Act 1988
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1988/en/act/pub/0028/index.html) .

In general, you may be considered homeless if you are:

  * Sleeping rough 
  * Staying in an emergency hostel or refuge 
  * Staying in bed and breakfast or hotel accommodation on a temporary basis 
  * Staying temporarily with friends or family because you have nowhere else to go 
  * Squatting (occupying a building illegally) 

**Information about practical supports if you are homeless**

If you are homeless, you can find practical information in our page [ housing
and other supports for homeless people
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home/supports-for-
homeless-people/) . We also have a page that lists different [ agencies and
organisations ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-
home/agencies-for-homeless-people/) that provide services to people who are
homeless as well as one that describes specific supports for [ young people
who are homeless ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-
home/youth-homelessness/) .  

##  The right to housing

There is no legal right to housing in Ireland. However, local authorities have
a responsibility to provide housing for adults who cannot afford it
themselves, and [ Tusla ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-
supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/) must provide
accommodation for children who are homeless or in need of care.

In December 2022, the Government committed to a referendum on the right to
housing in the [ Programme for Government
](https://merrionstreet.ie/en/about/programme-for-government/) .

[ The Housing Commission ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/2ae5e-the-housing-
commission/) was set-up to work on housing policy issues, including developing
proposals for the wording for a constitutional referendum on the right to
housing.

In late 2023, the Housing Commission completed their report. The Government is
now reviewing the report and considering the next steps.

##  Who is responsible for housing homeless people?

**Local authorities’ responsibilities**

Local authorities do not have a statutory obligation to house people, but they
do have general responsibility under the Housing Act 1988 to provide housing
for adults who cannot afford it for themselves. They may help with
accommodation either:

  * By providing housing directly 
  * Through arrangements with approved housing bodies and other voluntary bodies 

They may also provide funding to voluntary bodies for emergency accommodation
and for long-term housing for homeless people.

**The HSE’s responsibilities**

The [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](http://www.hse.ie/eng/) has general
responsibility for the health and in-house care needs of homeless people. This
means that local authorities are responsible for the costs of providing
accommodation while the HSE provides funding for the care and welfare needs of
homeless people, including in-house care.

**Tusla’s responsibilities**

[ Tusla ](http://tusla.ie/) is responsible for providing accommodation for
children under 18 who are homeless or in need of care. This is outlined in the
Child Care Act 1991. They may also provide aftercare facilities for young
people aged over 18. Read more on our page on [ youth homelessness
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-your-home/youth-
homelessness/) .

##  Housing policy

The Government’s policy on homelessness is based on a housing-led approach. It
aims to secure long-term housing for people who are homeless, with additional
social supports if necessary. This policy is covered in a number of different
plans and policies.

**Housing for All**

In 2021, the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage published [
Housing for All - a New Housing Plan for Ireland
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ef5ec-housing-for-all-a-new-housing-plan-
for-ireland/#view-the-plan) . This plan sets out the Government’s housing plan
for Ireland to 2030. One of the plans aims is to end homelessness by 2030. The
document outlines 4 different pathways to achieving this:

  * Supporting homeownership and increasing affordability 
  * Ending homelessness, increasing social housing delivery and supporting inclusion 
  * Increasing new housing supply 
  * Addressing vacancy and efficient use of existing housing stock 

**Housing First**

[ Housing First ](https://www.housingagency.ie/housing-information/housing-
first) works to secure permanent secure accommodation with extensive wrap-
around supports for people who are sleeping rough or have been in emergency
accommodation for a long time.

These wrap-around supports can include health supports to help with addiction
or mental health issues. This helps the most vulnerable homeless people to
maintain secure tenancies. The Department of Housing, Local Government and
Heritage has published its [ Housing First Implementation Plan for 2022 –
2026. ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/c49d0-housing-first-national-
implementation-plan-2022-2026/) This lists the number of people it intends to
help with this programme over the next few years.

**Youth Homelessness Strategy**

The Government launched a 3-year [ Youth Homelessness Strategy
](https://assets.gov.ie/239255/99c987df-4439-4bc2-8730-be614eae1e2e.pdf) in
November 2022. This focuses on ending homelessness for young people aged
18-24. The 3 main aims of the strategy are to:

  * Prevent young people from entering homelessness 
  * Improve the experiences of young people entering homelessness 
  * Assist young people in exiting homelessness 

**National Homelessness Action Committee**

The [ National Homelessness Action Committee
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/aad47-national-homeless-action-committee/)
is a cross-governmental and inter-agency group set up in 2021. They are
responsible for working across Government to ensure that actions in the
Housing for All plan are carried out. The committee also have a role in
addressing emerging homeless-related issues and in developing responses to
these issues.

##  Who monitors homelessness levels?

The number of people who are homeless is monitored to make sure there are
enough homeless services and to help develop housing policy. This is done in a
number of ways:

  * Local authorities carry out assessments of housing needs every year. The homeless people included in this assessment are those who are registered with the local authority and have been assessed as being in need of housing. The most recent [ housing need assessment ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/862a4-summary-of-social-housing-assessments-2022-key-findings/) was carried out in 2022. 
  * The Census of Population counts everyone living in Ireland every 5 years. It provides comprehensive information about the number of homeless people. 
  * The Dublin Region Homeless Executive conducts a [ rough sleeper count in the Dublin region ](https://www.homelessdublin.ie/info/figures?type=rough-sleeper-count&year=) every 6 months. 
  * The Government publish [ monthly reports on levels of homelessness ](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/80ea8-homelessness-data/) based on information gathered by local authorities. 

##  Further information

In Dublin, the [ Dublin Region Homeless Executive
](https://www.homelessdublin.ie/) is responsible for the co-ordination of
services for homeless people. In Cork, the Cork City Homeless Forum has
produced a [ guide to homeless services in Cork (pdf)
](https://www.corkcity.ie/en/media-folder/housing/guide-to-homeless-services-
in-cork.pdf) .

Focus Ireland lists the [ latest homelessness figures on the Focus Ireland
website ](https://www.focusireland.ie/resource-hub/latest-figures-
homelessness-ireland/) .

Read more about homelessness on the [ website of the Department of Housing,
Local Government and Heritage
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/76fb5-homelessness/?referrer=http://www.housing.gov.ie/housing/homelessness/policy/homelessness)
.

_**Page edited:** 20 December 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Homelessness%20and%20the%20right%20to%20housing&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Homelessness%20and%20the%20right%20to%20housing&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing-
your-home-and-homelessness/homelessness/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Youth homelessness_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/youth-homelessness/)

Supports for young people who are homeless or at risk of losing their home.

942.93164

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

918.489

  * [ _Rights and duties of asylum seekers in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/rights-and-obligations-of-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

People applying for international protection in Ireland have certain legal
rights. They also have important duties. Find out about these rights and
obligations.

840.4582

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

