**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Alcohol and drug treatment services
](/en/health/health-services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/) > Addiction
treatment services

#  Addiction treatment services

  * Introduction 
  * Treatment options 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you need treatment for addiction, there are different treatment options
available depending on your needs. You can find services in your local area on
[ Drugs.ie ](http://drugs.ie/) or [ Askaboutalcohol.ie
](https://www2.hse.ie/alcohol/) .

In the public health service, non-residential treatment is free of charge.
Addiction treatment services are provided by the Health Service Executive
(HSE) Drug and Alcohol Services. Some services are provided by community and
voluntary projects funded by the local or regional Drug and Alcohol Task
Force.

Addiction treatment is also available from private service providers.

##  Treatment options

Addiction can be treated in a residential or non-residential setting,
depending on your assessed needs and following a discussion with you about
your own personal requirements. Most people are treated in the community in
non-residential settings. Some of the treatment options available include:

  * Addiction counselling 
  * Detoxification 
  * Residential programmes 
  * Group support 

If you have mental health needs you can access your local [ mental health
services ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-services/)
for additional support.

Depending on your treatment needs, you may be referred back to your GP for
ongoing care.

###  Addiction counselling

Addiction counsellors can provide:

  * An assessment 
  * Brief intervention 
  * Counselling (such as cognitive behavioural therapy) 
  * Information 
  * Onward referral to treatment services 

Counselling can be provided on an individual basis or through group
counselling.

As well as addiction counselling, community care services may provide other
related courses. The issues that addiction presents in relationships may be
addressed in family therapy or couples therapy or in support groups for other
people who have been affected.

###  Detoxification

Detoxification removes the physical craving for alcohol or drugs that is a
symptom of addiction. Detoxification can take place on an out-patient basis
under the supervision of a GP or on an in-patient basis, depending on your
assessed needs. Self-detoxification may carry risks and you should always get
advice from a professional.

Detoxification does not deal with the psychological issues related to
addiction, so further support is usually provided when detoxification is
completed. You can talk to your GP about a suitable detoxification programme
and treatment plan.

###  Residential programmes

Residential treatment takes you away from your usual environment and access to
alcohol or drugs. Treatment is provided on an in-patient basis in a specialist
facility. Programmes will generally have a small number of participants. Talk
to your GP or local addiction service about your options and appropriate
referral to residential treatment.

###  Group meetings

There are groups that provide support to people recovering from addiction.
Groups are generally free of charge. Examples include Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) and Narcotics Anonymous (NA).

There are also support groups for family members affected by problem alcohol
or drug use.

See ‘Where to apply’ to find support groups in your area.

###  Gambling addiction

The treatment for addiction to gambling includes an initial assessment, a
comprehensive assessment and individual counselling. Services may provide
financial advice and onward referral to other services and supports where
appropriate, for example, Gamblers Anonymous.

##  Rates

Addiction services that are provided by the HSE are public services and out-
patient services are free of charge.

There may be a charge for residential programmes. However, these charges are
often on a sliding scale and your ability to cover the fees should not be a
barrier to you accessing the service. A medical card may cover stays in
selected drug treatment centres. If you have health insurance, contact your
insurer to find out if treatment costs are covered.

###  Private treatment services

Private treatment programmes are not free of charge and prices vary depending
on the programme. These costs may be covered by [ private health insurance
](/en/health/health-system/private-health-insurance/) . For more details on
access to private treatment services, contact the service provider.

##  How to apply

Your [ Local Health Office ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/lho) can
help you find addiction services in your area. Your GP can also refer you to
your local addiction services where you will be assessed and can discuss your
treatment options. Pharmacists can also refer you to appropriate services like
addiction treatment and counselling centres.

Private treatment programmes vary in their admission requirements. Contact the
service provider directly for more information. If you need advice, your GP
can discuss the options with you.

##  Where to apply

You can contact your Local Health Office for information about HSE addiction
services.

[ Drugs.ie ](http://drugs.ie/) and [ Askaboutalcohol.ie
](https://www2.hse.ie/alcohol/) are HSE websites with information about drug
and alcohol services. Each has a directory of services that you can search to
find specific services in your local area.

The HSE [ Drugs and Alcohol Helpline ](http://www.drugs.ie/phone) provides
support, information and referral to services. Call Freephone 1800 459 459 or
email [ helpline@hse.ie ](mailto:helpline@hse.ie) .

_**Page edited:** 1 October 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Addiction%20treatment%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Addiction%20treatment%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/alcohol-and-drug-treatment-services/alcohol-addiction-
services/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Agencies providing services for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/agencies-for-homeless-people/)

Organisations providing services to people who find themselves without a home.

1080.8217

  * [ _Regulation of postal services and electronic communications_ ](/en/consumer/phone-internet-tv-and-postal-services/regulation-of-postal-services-phone-internet-radion-and-tv/)

The Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg) regulates the electronic
communications sector in Ireland. Find out more about how it protects
consumers, promotes competition and encourages innovation.

934.1985

  * [ _Regulation of school age childcare services_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/regulation-of-school-age-childcare/)

School age childcare providers are regulated by law. Find out about the rules
that apply to childcare services providing care to school age children.

913.61993

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

