**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Drinking
water and water supply ](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/) > Septic tanks and
other domestic waste water treatment systems

#  Septic tanks and other domestic waste water treatment systems

  * Introduction 
  * Do I have to register my septic tank? 
  * Will my treatment system be inspected? 
  * Can I get a grant to repair or replace my septic tank? 
  * More information on septic tanks 

##  Introduction

Domestic waste water treatment systems, such as septic tanks, collect, treat
and discharge waste water from households that are not connected to public
sewer systems.

If you have one of these systems, you must register it. It can be inspected by
a local authority to prevent any risk to the public and the environment.

##  Do I have to register my septic tank?

All domestic waste water treatment systems, including [ septic tanks
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/de792-what-you-need-to-know-about-your-
septic-tank-leaflet/) , must be registered with your [ local authority
](https://www.housingagency.ie/find-my-local-authority) . There is a fee of
€50 to register your waste water treatment system.

You can register and pay online at [ protectourwater.ie
](https://www.protectourwater.ie/Register.aspx) .

If you do not register your system and are convicted, you could be fined up to
€5,000.

If you want to get a grant to repair or replace your treatment system in the
future, your treatment system must be registered within a certain time frame.
Replacement systems do not need to be re-registered.

##  Will my treatment system be inspected?

Your waste water treatment system can be inspected by the local authority.
Your local authority will write to you and let you know that they will be
inspecting your system. They will give you at least 10 working days’ notice
before the inspection.

If your waste water system is going to be inspected, you should:

  * Have your waste water systems registration certificate 
  * Know where your waste water treatment system is 
  * Have any paperwork about your system’s installation or maintenance 

Inspectors are appointed by the [ Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
](https://www.epa.ie/licensing/watwaste/wwda/) and must show you their
identification if you ask for it.

If your treatment system is working properly, you will get a certificate that
confirms this. If the inspector finds issues with your system, you will get an
advisory notice within 21 days of the inspection. This notice will outline the
problems with your system and give you a certain amount of time to fix them.
You may be able to get a grant to repair or upgrade your system (see below).

Find out more about [ maintaining your septic tank
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/de792-what-you-need-to-know-about-your-
septic-tank-leaflet/) and [ septic tank inspections
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/424fd-what-to-expect-from-a-septic-tank-
inspection-leaflet/) .

##  Can I get a grant to repair or replace my septic tank?

You may be able to get a grant to repair, upgrade or replace your waste water
treatment system. You can apply for funding for 85% of the cost of the repairs
to your system or a new system, up to a maximum of €12,000.

On 1 January 2024, [ the septic tank grant was updated
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/40ec0-minister-obrien-announces-
increase-in-septic-tank-grants/) . The grant increased from €5,000 to €12,000
and the qualification criteria changed so people could get the grant even if
they hadn’t registered their septic tank by 1 February 2013.

For more information on how to apply, see below.

###  **Different types of grants**

There are 3 different waste water treatment grant schemes. One [ grant (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/111081/3750f7d4-d44d-4e9c-aaec-938f33cd8cbc.pdf) is
available for people to upgrade or repair their system following an
inspection. While the other 2 grants are only available if you live in a
particular area, and are notified by your local authority that you are
eligible to apply.

Find out more about the [ criteria for each of the schemes
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/6cc1e-domestic-waste-water-treatment-
systems-septic-tanks/#financial-assistance) on gov.ie.

You cannot get a grant for the routine maintenance, servicing or de-sludging
of a treatment system.

###  How to apply for a septic tank grant

Application forms for each scheme are available from your [ local authority
](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.ie%2Fen%2Fpublication%2F942f74-local-
authorities%2F&data=05%7C02%7CJames.Holohan%40ciboard.ie%7C4c1f8798f98e48fa3db008dc74dedfe4%7Cbb4e61ce39a3414abb5d6a0290c95fd9%7C0%7C0%7C638513747812406321%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=iLqpRvogErqdi6f3rB9oS9hnjGbTTF4R%2BhUrr8ovKR0%3D&reserved=0)
.

For more information on these schemes, you can contact the rural water section
of your local authority.

##  More information on septic tanks

The Environmental Protection Agency has published a set of [ Frequently Asked
Questions about waste water treatment systems
](http://www.epa.ie/water/wastewater/legislation/faq/) .

There is also a [ detailed set of FAQs
](https://www.protectourwater.ie/Faq.aspx) on protectourwater.ie.

You can contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) or the [
Environmental Protection Agency ](http://www.epa.ie/) for more information.

_**Page edited:** 15 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/water-
and-coasts/domestic-wastewater-treatment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Septic%20tanks%20and%20other%20domestic%20waste%20water%20treatment%20systems&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/water-
and-coasts/domestic-wastewater-treatment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/water-
and-coasts/domestic-wastewater-treatment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Septic%20tanks%20and%20other%20domestic%20waste%20water%20treatment%20systems&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/water-
and-coasts/domestic-wastewater-treatment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Domestic violence and abuse_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/domestic-violence-and-abuse/)

There are many different forms of domestic abuse. Find out what they are and
what help is available.

1227.2185

  * [ _Monitoring and treatment of sex offenders in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/)

This document provides information about the treatment and monitoring of sex
offenders in Ireland. It includes detail on the sex offenders register, post-
release supervision orders, sex offender orders and the treatment of sex
offenders in prison.

1168.981

  * [ _Fertility treatments and assisted human reproduction in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/fertility-treatments-and-dahr/)

Fertility treatments can help improve your chances of becoming pregnant. What
treatments are available and what is donor-assisted human reproduction.

1052.7358

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

