**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health system
](/en/health/health-system/) > Department of Health

#  Department of Health

  * Introduction 
  * Organisation of the Department 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Government, the Minister for Health and the Department of Health are at
the head of the health service. The Department's main role is to support the
Minister and Ministers of State in the development and implementation of
policy for the health services. It also monitors the performance of health
services.

Health services are delivered by the [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) .

##  Organisation of the Department

The Minister for Health has overall constitutional and political
responsibility for the Department.

There are 3 [ Ministers of State assigned to the Department
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-health/) with
responsibility for:

  * Disability 
  * Public health, wellbeing and the National Drugs Strategy 
  * Mental health and older people 

The administrative (Civil Service) head of the Department is the Secretary
General. They are the "accounting officer". In other words, they are
responsible to [ the DÃ¡il
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/national_government/houses_of_the_oireachtas/dail_eireann.html)
for ensuring that the money allocated to the Department is spent in the proper
manner.

The Chief Medical Officer advises the Minister, Ministers of State, and the
Department on medical issues and is also responsible for patient safety and
quality, clinical effectiveness, health protection and promotion, tobacco
control policy, health and wellbeing, social inclusion and bioethics.

[ Read more about the Department of Health
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/7d70f7-about-the-department-
of-health/) , including the organisation structure. There are a number of
divisions within the Department that each have a different policy or
administrative function. Each division includes a number of units with
specific areas of responsibility.

##  Where to apply

###  Department of Health

Block 1  
Miesian Plaza  
50-58 Lower Baggot Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 XW14

**Tel:** +353 1 635 4000

**Homepage:** [ http://health.gov.ie/ ](http://health.gov.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@health.gov.ie ](mailto:info@health.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 8 July 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/department-of-health-and-children/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Department%20of%20Health&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/department-of-health-and-children/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/department-of-health-and-children/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Department%20of%20Health&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/department-of-health-and-children/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Inspector of Mental Health Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/inspector-of-mental-health-services/)

This document describes the Inspector of Mental Health Services who is
appointed under the Mental Health Act 2001.

1875.1914

  * [ _Overview of mental health and mental illness_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-and-mental-illness/)

An overview of the mental health category including links to documents on
mental health services, community care, and the Mental Health Act 2001.

1753.6387

  * [ _Ministers and Government departments_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/national-government/departments-of-state/)

There are 18 Departments of State. Information about each Department, how they
are run and links to their websites.

1560.5039

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

