**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Buying a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/) > Steps involved in buying a home

#  Steps involved in buying a home

  * Introduction 
  * Before you decide to buy 
  * How to buy the property you want 
  * Signing the contract for sale 
  * Closing the sale 
  * After the sale is completed 
  * Useful contacts 

##  Introduction

At some point in your life you may want to buy a home. This page covers the
different stages involved in doing this.

There are no residency-based restrictions to buying property in Ireland. You
can buy property here if you are an Irish citizen, EU/EEA citizen, non-EEA
national or even non-resident in Ireland. However, owning property in Ireland
does not mean you have the right to live here. Your [ right to live in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving_country/moving_to_ireland/rights_of_residence_in_ireland/)
depends on your personal circumstances and is separate to property ownership.

##  Before you decide to buy

###  Find out what you can afford  

You should review your budget to find out how much you can afford in monthly
mortgage repayments. You should ensure that you have enough to cover all the [
costs involved in buying a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/costs-of-buying-a-home/) , for example, mortgage costs, legal fees,
insurance and stamp duty. The amount of money you can get as a mortgage loan,
and the amount you need as a deposit are governed by Central Bank lending
limits - see [ Taking out a mortgage ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) for details of these rules. The
Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has a [ budget planner
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/budget-planner/) that
you can use to see how much you can afford each month.

###  Get a solicitor

While you are looking for a property, you should hire a solicitor to do the
_conveyancing_ . Conveyancing is the legal work involved in buying or selling
property. Conveyancing charges can vary between solicitors, so it is worth
contacting several solicitors to compare prices. You can use the [ Law
Society’s website ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-
Search/) to find a solicitor in your area.

###  Find a property you like and can afford

Property websites, auctioneers and estate agents are the main ways to find
properties that are for sale. You can find a [ public register of auctioneers
and estate agents ](https://www.psr.ie/psra-registers/register-of-licensed-
property-services-providers/) on theProperty Services Regulatory Authority's
website.

Sometimes individual sellers advertise property themselves. Newspapers may
also have property supplements or publish advertisements about properties for
sale.

The Property Services Regulatory Authority publishes a [ Residential Property
Price Register ](https://www.propertypriceregister.ie/) , which contains
information on residential properties bought in Ireland since 1 January 2010.
You can check the register to see how much was paid for a property. This can
be useful to find out the price properties have sold for in the area you are
looking to buy.

All homes for sale must have a [ Building Energy Rating (BER)
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-
your-home/) . A BER will tell you how energy-efficient the home is. It will
help you make an informed choice when comparing properties.

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommends that you check whether
the home is in a High Radon Area on its [ Radon Risk Map
](http://www.epa.ie/radiation) and enquire about if it has been tested for
radon. More information on radon in homes is available from the [ EPA
](http://www.epa.ie) and in our page on [ measurement of radon levels
](/en/environment/buildings-and-structures/radon-in-buildings/) .

The CCPC has a checklist of what to consider when [ Looking for a property
(pdf) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2017/07/Buying-a-home-checklist-1-looking-around.pdf)
, and another checklist with questions you can ask to [ Find out more about a
property (pdf) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2017/07/Buying-a-home-checklist-2-finding-out-
more.pdf) , if you are particularly interested in a property.

###  Get a survey

A seller does not have to tell you about defects in a property. So, before you
finalise the purchase, you should get a survey of the property to find out if
there are any defects. The survey will help highlight any issues you may not
have been aware of when you made your offer. For example, if your surveyor
finds that the roof needs to be replaced, you could change your offer to
account for this, or decide not to buy. The [ Society of Chartered Surveyors
Ireland (SCSI) ](http://www.scsi.ie/) is the professional body for chartered
surveyors.

###  Get mortgage approval

Very few people can buy a home without getting a [ mortgage
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) .
A mortgage is a long-term loan secured against the property you buy. This
means if you don’t repay your mortgage, you may lose your home.

There are different types of mortgages and different mortgage providers.
Contact several different mortgage providers to find out who can offer you the
best deal. More information on mortgages and choosing the best one for you is
available from the [ Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC)
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/mortgages/) . The CCPC has a [ mortgage
calculator ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/mortgage-
calculators/mortgage-calculator/) that shows what your monthly repayments will
be depending on the amount you borrow, how long the mortgage will last and the
interest rate.

You can get mortgage approval in principle before you start to look for a
property. This lets you know how much you have to spend. However, when you
find a property you like, you must get formal mortgage approval before you
sign the contract for sale (see below). If you sign a contract for sale and
then don’t get mortgage approval, you will lose your deposit and there may be
other penalties.

For more detailed information, see our page on [ taking out a mortgage
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) .

##  How to buy the property you want

In general properties are purchased and sold either by:  
• Private treaty  
• Public auction

###  Private treaty sale

A private treaty sale is where the property is not put into an auction. You
can contact the seller or the seller’s agent, usually an estate agent, to
agree a purchase price.

If there is an estate agent involved, once you have agreed to buy the property
you may need to pay a booking deposit to the estate agent. The legal process
to buy the property may only start when the estate agent receives your booking
deposit. This deposit is refundable up to the signing of the contract for sale
(see below).

Your mortgage provider will give you formal mortgage approval and issue you
with a loan pack. You will need to think about [ mortgage protection insurance
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/insurance-protection-on-mortgages/)
and [ home insurance ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/insurance/home-
insurance/) . You can organise these with your mortgage provider but it is
advisable to shop around. When your solicitor has checked the contract for
sale, you will sign it and pay a deposit (less any booking fee).

###  Public auction

Auctions are usually advertised in a local newspaper, estate agent or by a
sign on the property. Generally, the seller or the auctioneer will set a
reserve figure for the property. The reserve figure is the value the property
must reach at auction. If the property does not reach the reserve figure it
will be withdrawn from the market.

The seller can also withdraw the property from the market at any time during
the auction, even if it has achieved the reserve figure. The seller can also
sell the property before the auction.

Before the auction takes place, your solicitor should check the contract for
sale for the property (issued by the seller's solicitor) and all title
documents that are referred to in that contract. When your solicitor has
satisfied their enquiries, you can organise a survey of the property to ensure
it is sound. You should also get formal mortgage approval for the property you
want to bid on.

The successful bidder immediately pays a deposit and signs the contract for
sale (see below). It is important to get home insurance as soon as possible.

###  Estate agents and auctioneers

Estate agents and auctioneers act on behalf of the seller and in the seller’s
interest. There are [ rules ](https://www.psr.ie/consumers-
information/engaging-a-property-services-provider/) and a [ Code of Practice
](https://www.psr.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/PSPs-Code-of-Practice.pdf)
outlining how they should behave when delivering their services, and they are
[ regulated by the Property Services Regulatory Authority (PSRA)
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/regulation-of-property-services/) .
If you have a complaint about an estate agent or auctioneer, you should
contact the PSRA - see 'Where to apply' below.

##  Signing the contract for sale

The _contract for sale_ binds the parties to the completion of the sale. If
you withdraw from the sale after this contract has been signed, you may lose
your deposit. If you buy at auction you must immediately sign the contract for
sale. If you buy through private treaty your solicitor will check that the
contract is in order before you sign it. The completion date will be set out
in the contract and the balance of the agreed purchase price will be due on
that date.

##  Closing the sale

###  Requisitions on Title and Deed of Conveyance  

After signing the contract and before the completion date of the sale, your
solicitor raises some general queries about the property with the seller's
solicitor. _Requisitions on Title_ are a standard set of questions relating to
the sale of a property that deal with such things as whether fixtures and
fittings are included in the sale.

When your solicitor gets a satisfactory reply to Requisitions on Title, they
will draft a _Deed of Conveyance_ which is then approved by the seller's
solicitor.

Your solicitor will check that there are no judgements against the seller (for
example, bankruptcy or sheriffs' searches). Your solicitor should also find
out where the title to the property is held (either in the Land Registry or
the Registry of Deeds) to ensure that there is nothing unusual relating to the
property, for example, an outstanding mortgage.

Once the Deed of Conveyance is approved by the seller's solicitor, your
solicitor will contact your mortgage provider to request the approved loan
cheque. This is the remaining balance of the purchase price. It is paid to the
seller's solicitor and all documentation, and keys to the premises are handed
over to your solicitor.

###  Stamp duty  

Your solicitor will calculate how much [ stamp duty ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/stamp-duty/) is due on the property and request this amount
from you before the sale is closed. The stamp duty is paid to the [ Revenue
Commissioners ](http://www.revenue.ie/) , who place a stamp on the deeds.
Without this stamp, the deeds cannot be registered. The deeds name the owner
of the property.

##  After the sale is completed

###  Deeds  

Once a sale is completed, your [ deeds ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/property-deeds/) , showing the new ownership details must be registered
with either the Registry of Deeds or the Land Registry. [ Tailte Éireann
](https://www.tailte.ie/registration/) is responsible for both systems of
registration.

Your solicitor will help you to finalise the deeds to your house with Tailte
Éireann. This can take months or years to complete. Even if this does take a
long time, you are still the owner of the property and, if you want, you can
sell the property before registration is complete.

###  Moving house  

There are many things to do when moving house, for example, redirecting your
post and changing your details on the [ electoral register ](/en/government-
in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/registering-to-vote/) . More
information is available in our page on [ moving to a new home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/moving-to-a-new-home/) .

##  Useful contacts

###  Property Services Regulatory Authority

Property Services Regulatory Authority

Abbey Buildings  
Abbey Road  
Navan  
Co. Meath  
C15 K7PY

**Tel:** (046) 903 3800

**Locall:** 1800 252 712

**Fax:** (046) 903 3888

**Homepage:** [ http://www.psr.ie ](http://www.psr.ie)

**Email:** [ info@psr.ie ](mailto:info@psr.ie)

###  Registry of Deeds

Henrietta Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 EK82  
Ireland

**Tel:** 051 303000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.tailte.ie/ ](https://www.tailte.ie/)

###  National Stamp Duty Office

New Stamping Building  
Dublin Castle  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 738 3646 (Tuesday to Thursday: 10am - 1pm)

**Homepage:** [ http://www.revenue.ie ](http://www.revenue.ie)

**Email:** [ dublinstamp@revenue.ie ](mailto:dublinstamp@revenue.ie)

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

_**Page edited:** 18 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Steps%20involved%20in%20buying%20a%20home&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Steps%20involved%20in%20buying%20a%20home&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-
home/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Buying or inheriting a local authority home_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/buying-or-inheriting-a-local-authority-home/)

Schemes for local authority tenants to buy their homes at a discount as well
ways in which you might inherit one..

1364.6321

  * [ _Costs of buying a home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/costs-of-buying-a-home/)

As well as mortgage payments, the other costs involved in buying a home can be
significant.

1135.241

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and buying private health insurance_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-and-buying-private-health-insurance/)

Outlines things you should consider when buying private health insurance as a
returning Irish emigrant. Covers waiting periods, pre-existing conditions,
age-related loading and maternity related claims.

1083.4077

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

