**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Health services for people with
disabilities ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-
disabilities/) > Regulation of residential services for people with
disabilities

#  Regulation of residential services for people with disabilities

  * Who regulates residential services for people with disabilities? 
  * Standards in residential services for people with disabilities 
  * Responsibilities of the residential service providers 
  * Inspections of residential services 
  * Inspection reports 
  * Making a complaint 
  * More information 

##  Who regulates residential services for people with disabilities?

If you or somebody you know lives in a residential service for people with
disabilities, the service must meet certain standards. These standards apply
to all residential services, including:

  * Respite services run by the Health Service Executive (HSE) 
  * Respite services run by public, private or voluntary bodies that are funded or assisted by the HSE 

You may also want to read about on the [ regulation of residential care for
older people ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-
people/) .

####  HIQA

The [ Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) ](https://www.hiqa.ie/)
registers and inspects all the residential services for children and adults
with disabilities. All designated centres for people with disabilities must
register with HIQA.

HIQA publishes inspection reports after every inspection. You can [ download
the inspection reports ](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-and-
publications/inspection-reports) from HIQA’s website. Read more about HIQA
reporting below.

##  Standards in residential services for people with disabilities

HIQA inspects your residential service against the [ National Standards for
Residential Services for Children and Adults with Disabilities
](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-and-publications/standard/national-standards-
residential-services-children-and-adults) to make sure it complies with the
regulations.

The standards set out what a resident, their family, a carer, and the public
can expect in a residential care setting for people with disabilities. Service
providers must make sure they meet these standards.

###  Standards for residential services

The [ National Standards ](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-and-
publications/standard/national-standards-residential-services-children-and-
adults) are grouped under 8 key themes. The first 4 relate to quality and
safety:

  * Individualised supports and care 
  * Effective services 
  * Safe services 
  * Health and development 

And 4 relate to capacity and capability:

  * Leadership, governance and management 
  * Use of resources 
  * Responsive workforce 
  * Use of information 

You can find [ easy-to-read guides of the standards for adults and for
children, and an audio guide to the standards ](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-
and-publications/standard/national-standards-residential-services-children-
and-adults) , on HIQA’s website.

##  Responsibilities of the residential service providers

Your residential service must register with HIQA to open and operate.

In order to get a registration certificate, the residential service must show
that it meets the:

  * Relevant standards 
  * Legal requirements 
  * Needs of the residents 

The residential service must re-register for a registration certificate every
3 years.

##  Inspections of residential services

HIQA inspects the residential services against the [ National Standards
](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-and-publications/standard/national-standards-
residential-services-children-and-adults) and against laws and regulations.

These inspections can be announced beforehand or unannounced. Inspections can
happen anytime during the day, evening, night, or weekend.

####  **What happens during an inspection?**

If you live in a residential facility, inspectors will talk to you and your
family. They will also talk to managers, staff and interested people who want
to speak to them.

The HIQA inspectors will ask you about your experience of living in the
residential service and what it is like to live there. They will also look at
the daily routines, the quality of the accommodation and meals, and other
aspects of daily life in the residential service.

The inspector wants to make sure you are safe and that you have a good quality
of life. They also want to check that you are included in decisions about your
personal care, and that you get support for your individual health and social
needs.

####  **What happens after an inspection?**

If the HIQA inspectors find that your residential service is unsafe, or that
the [ National Standards ](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-and-
publications/standard/national-standards-residential-services-children-and-
adults) and regulations are not being met, it has the legal power to take
action for you and the other people living there.

When this happens, HIQA can refuse to register the service, cancel the service
registration, or add conditions to the registration of that service.

##  Inspection reports

You can [ download the HIQA inspection reports ](https://www.hiqa.ie/reports-
and-publications/inspection-reports) from the HIQAs website.

Inspection reports give information about the residential services, the number
of places available, and the general facilities. The report tells you which
standards of care are good and which standards can be improved.

The inspection report also identifies what the residential home needs to do to
improve its service to people with disabilities.

##  Making a complaint

If you have a concern about a service, you can [ give information to HIQA
](https://www.hiqa.ie/concern-about-services) by phone, email or post.

While HIQA cannot investigate specific complaints, it reviews all the
information they get, which influences how it monitors services.

For example, if you give HIQA unsolicited information about a service, it can
then request the service provider to carry out an investigation or give more
information on that service.

##  More information

###  Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA)

Unit 1301,  
City Gate,  
Mahon,  
Co. Cork,  
T12 W7CV  
  
Regional office  
George's Court,  
George's Lane  
Dublin 7,  
D07 E98Y

**Tel:** (021) 240 9300 or (01) 814 7400

**Homepage:** [ http://www.hiqa.ie/ ](http://www.hiqa.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@hiqa.ie ](mailto:info@hiqa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 30 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-
care-people-with-disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Regulation%20of%20residential%20services%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-
care-people-with-disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-
care-people-with-disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Regulation%20of%20residential%20services%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-
care-people-with-disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Health services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/health-services-for-people-with-intellectual-physical-or-sensory-disabilities/)

A general introduction to the services provided by the Health Service
Executive (HSE) for people with disabilities.

2766.4055

  * [ _Regulation of residential care for older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-people/)

National quality standards are enforced in both public and private nursing
homes by HIQA, the Health Information and Quality Authority. Inspection
reports are available from them.

2546.3208

  * [ _Assessment of need for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-disabilites/)

The Disability Act 2005 provides for the Assessment of Need for people with
disabilities. Find out how the assessment is carried out.

2322.032

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

