**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Mortgage arrears ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/) > Alternative repayment arrangements for people in
mortgage difficulty

#  Alternative repayment arrangements for people in mortgage difficulty

  * What is an alternative repayment arrangement? 
  * What should I consider if I am offered an alternative repayment arrangement? 
  * What alternative repayment arrangements can I be offered? 
  * Alternative repayment arrangements and your mortgage 
  * What other options do I have? 
  * Can I appeal or make a complaint? 

##  What is an alternative repayment arrangement?

If you are having difficulty [ paying the mortgage ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) on your home, your lender
may offer you an _alternative repayment arrangement_ . Alternative repayment
arrangements offer you different ways to pay your mortgage if you are in
financial difficulty. For example, you might only pay the interest on the
mortgage for a while, or you might extend the term of your mortgage to reduce
your repayments. These arrangements are often called a mortgage restructure.
The arrangements available from your lender may be part of the [ Mortgage
Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-process/) or outside it.

Your lender will look at your personal circumstances and choose an alternative
repayment arrangement that they think is appropriate and sustainable for you.
If your lender does not offer you an alternative repayment arrangement, or if
you cannot agree on one, you may need to consider other options, such as
selling the property or surrendering it to the lender.

##  What should I consider if I am offered an alternative repayment
arrangement?

You should consider the affordability and sustainability of the arrangement
you are being offered. You will be signing a new mortgage contract and will be
bound by its terms for the duration of the agreement.

###  Can I afford the alternative repayment arrangement?

When assessing if you can afford the proposed repayments, you should consider:

  * Your current net monthly income 
  * All your current monthly outgoings 
  * The net disposable income that you will have left to pay the mortgage 
  * How much your assets are worth 
  * Any other debts you have 
  * If the alternative repayment arrangement offered is a short-term one, whether you will be able to pay the higher repayments when the arrangement ends 

Most lenders have family finance budgeting tools on their websites that can
help you work out if you can afford the arrangement being offered. MABS has a
[ budget tool ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-budget/) and the Insolvency
Service of Ireland (ISI) has a [ reasonable living expenses calculator
](https://backontrack.ie/rle-calculator/) to help you with this. If your
arragement is part of the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP), you will
have completed a [ Standard Financial Statement (pdf)
](http://www.centralbank.ie/consumer/info/documents/industry%20standard%20financial%20statement.pdf)
for your lender. You can use this to review your income and outgoings.

###  How sustainable is the arrangement I am being offered?

To assess whether you can keep up payments for the remaining term of the
mortgage, you need to consider:

  * What might change in your personal situation 
  * If future external changes will affect your ability to repay 

It may be difficult to forecast into the future. But you can assess certain
changes, for example, what level of interest rate increase you could manage.

Things to consider include:

  * Your current and future income. 
  * Your current and future expenditure. 
  * Your age and stage in life. For example, your children may need childcare now or may need support going to college in the future. 
  * Future interest rates and the future value of your assets. 
  * The possibility of inheritances or other lump sums in the future. 

The CPPC has a [ mortgage rate change calculator
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/mortgage-
calculators/mortgage-rate-change-calculator/) to help you with this.

##  What alternative repayment arrangements can I be offered?

Lenders may offer slightly different alternative repayment arrangements. There
are short-term and long-term alternative repayment arrangements. Short-term
arrangements have a specific duration and will expire. For example, a 6-month
interest-only arrangement. Long-term arrangements may run for the term of the
mortgage or extend its term. Below are some examples of alternative repayment
arrangements.

###  Temporary deferral of payment

This is where you postpone your payments for an agreed amount of time. This is
usually a short-term arrangement to ease immediate financial pressure. It is
also called a payment break or a moratorium.

###  Move to an interest-only mortgage or change the way you pay interest

This means you only pay the interest due on your loan and not the capital for
a certain amount of time. You may be offered an interest-only option for under
or over a year.

In some cases, you may be offered a less than interest-only arrangement for a
short period. This may be done if you cannot afford the interest-only
repayments. The difference between this lower amount and the interest-only
repayment amount may be added on to your outstanding mortgage balance when the
alternative repayment arrangement expires.

You may also be offered a fixed repayment option. This is where you pay more
than just the interest, but less than your full capital and interest
repayment, for a fixed period. This means that you pay interest and some
capital towards your mortgage.

All of these short-term alternative repayment arrangements are only suitable
if you think that you will be able to return to meeting your full capital and
interest repayments in the near future.

When the interest-only period ends, your lender will recalculate your mortgage
repayments based on the remaining term and the outstanding mortgage balance.
This means that your repayments will increase, as you now have a shorter term
to pay back the outstanding mortgage balance. If you are offered a long-term
interest-only option, you may need to sell your property to pay the
outstanding mortgage balance when the mortgage term expires.

###  Extending the term of the mortgage

This means that your mortgage term is extended. So, you pay less each month
because you have spread the repayments over a longer period of time. The cost
of your credit will increase if you extend your mortgage, as it will take you
longer to pay your mortgage in full. Cost of credit is the difference between
the amount that you borrow and the total amount that you will repay, including
interest.

If you are thinking about extending your mortgage there are some things you
should consider including:

  * What age will you be when the mortgage expires? 
  * Do you have a compulsory retirement age, or can you continue to work beyond retirement age? 
  * If you retire before the mortgage has been paid off, will your pension or other income allow you to continue to pay the mortgage? 
  * Are you clear on what happens due to the revised term? While you may be paying less each month, your cost of credit will increase over the extended mortgage term. 

###  Capitalising arrears and interest

This arrangement adds the arrears on to the outstanding mortgage balance. The
increased mortgage balance is then paid over the remaining term of the
mortgage. This may increase your monthly payments. This arrangement may be
combined with a term extension so that your monthly payments are less.

###  Split mortgages

If you are not able to pay your current mortgage payments, but your
circumstances may improve in the future, you may be offered a split mortgage.
A split mortgage arrangement splits the mortgage into 2 parts. You make agreed
repayments on the first part of the mortgage and the second part is warehoused
or set aside to be paid at a later date. Some lenders may write off part of
the warehoused loan, some add interest to the warehoused part of the mortgage
and others do not. The main aim of a split mortgage is to allow you to stay in
your family home.

If you are offered a split mortgage you should consider:

  * What percentage of any lump sum you may receive in the future must be paid towards the warehoused loan? For example, if you get an inheritance or a bonus. 
  * What happens when the loan reaches the date it is scheduled to be paid in full? Do you have to sell the property to repay the outstanding mortgage balance? Or will you keep a right of tenure, where the outstanding debt will only be recovered after your death? 

###  Reduction in the capital amount

Your bank may agree to reduce the overall amount outstanding on your mortgage.

##  Alternative repayment arrangements and your mortgage

In general, you cannot be asked to change from an existing tracker mortgage to
another mortgage type. But if the lender considers that the tracker interest
rate is inappropriate and unsustainable for you, they may offer you an
arrangement where you change from a tracker mortgage to another mortgage type.
Your lender can only do this if the new arrangement is affordable and
sustainable over the long term.

The Central Bank's [ lending limits on mortgages ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/paying-for-a-home#l4e5b7) do not apply to the
restructuring of mortgages.

###  Trial arrangements

Some lenders may approve a trial arrangement before finalising the
arrangement. In some cases, the proposal will amend the terms of your original
contract, in effect creating a new contract. In other cases, you may be asked
to enter into a completely new contract with your lender.

###  Alternative repayment arrangements under the MARP

If you are being offered an alternative repayment arrangement under the [
Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-process/) , you must always
get:

A clear written explanation of how the alternative repayment arrangement works

  * The proposed new repayment amount 
  * The term of the arrangement 
  * The impact on the mortgage term 
  * The outstanding balance 
  * The existing arrears 
  * Information on how interest will be applied to your mortgage loan account as a result of this arrangement 
  * Information on how the arrangement will be reported to the Irish Credit Bureau and the subsequent impact on your [ credit record ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-credit-history/)
  * Information on your right to appeal the lender’s decision, including how to submit an appeal 

You must also be told to get independent advice on the proposal. As part of
the [ Mortgage Arrears Information and Advice Service ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-process/) , your lender will
pay €250 for a consultation with an accountant of your choice. You can find a
[ list of participating accountants on MABS.ie ](https://mabs.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2022/02/MAIAS_Panel_26Jan2022.pdf) . The [ Abhaile scheme
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-mortgage-arrears-
support/) has a separate [ panel of accountants (pdf) ](https://mabs.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/abh.accountant.panel_.18.07.2022.pdf) that also
provide free financial advice.

##  What other options do I have?

If your lender does not offer you an alternative repayment arrangement, or if
you cannot agree on one being offered, you may need to consider other options.
Your lender must inform you in writing about the options that are available to
you. These may include:

  * Voluntary surrender 
  * Trading down 
  * Mortgage-to-rent 
  * Voluntary sale 

You must be informed of the implications of each option and what will happen
to any outstanding debt. Your lender must also inform you in writing that you
are now outside the MARP, and that repossession proceedings can follow either
3 months from the date the letter is issued or 8 months from the date your
arrears arose, whichever date is later. You must be told about [ personal
insolvency options ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/) , the importance of taking
independent advice and your right to [ appeal or complain
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-
process#l12fa2) .

You may also be able to get advice and support under the [ Abhaile scheme.
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-mortgage-arrears-
support/)

###  Voluntary surrender of the property

You surrender the property to your lender. If the property sells for less than
the outstanding mortgage balance, you still owe the balance. You will need to
agree a repayment arrangement with your lender to deal with this amount.

###  Trade-down mortgages

You may be able to sell your property and buy a new property that costs less.
It may be possible to add negative equity to the loan and secure it on the new
property.

###  Mortgage to rent

Under the national [ mortgage-to-rent scheme ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/mortgage-to-rent-scheme/) , people who are having
trouble paying their mortgages to private lenders can switch from owning their
home to renting their home as social tenants. If you take up the mortgage-to-
rent option, you will no longer own your home or have any financial interest
in it.

###  Voluntary sale of the property

You sell the property yourself. If the property sells for less than the
outstanding mortgage balance, you remain liable for this. You will need to
agree a repayment arrangement with your lender to deal with this amount.

###  Personal Insolvency Arrangements (PIA) and bankruptcy

If you and your lender cannot come to an agreement on modifying or
restructuring your mortgage, you can also consider a [ Personal Insolvency
Arrangement (PIA) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/personal-insolvency-arrangements/) . Under a PIA, all of your
debts, including your mortgage, are assessed and an agreed plan is made to
repay your creditors. A PIA needs to be approved at a creditors’ meeting (by a
qualified majority of creditors). If you are in very serious financial
difficulties, [ bankruptcy ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/what-is-bankruptcy/) may also be an option.

##  Can I appeal or make a complaint?

If you are refused an alternative repayment arrangement, or you reject the
arrangement being offered, you can appeal the decision to your lender’s
Appeals Board. The appeal must be decided within 40 business days of being
received. The lender must write to you within 5 business days of this, to tell
you the decision of the Appeals Board and explain the terms of any offer being
made.

If you are not happy with the lender’s treatment of your case, you can
complain to the lender under the [ Central Bank’s Consumer Protection Code
2012 ](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/Regulation/consumer-
protection/other-codes-of-conduct/4-gns-4-2-7-cp-code-2012.pdf?sfvrsn=4) .

If you are not happy with the outcome of an appeal or complaint, you can refer
it to the [ Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman ](https://www.fspo.ie/)
.

_**Page edited:** 20 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/alternative-mortgage-repayment-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Alternative%20repayment%20arrangements%20for%20people%20in%20mortgage%20difficulty&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/alternative-mortgage-repayment-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/alternative-mortgage-repayment-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Alternative%20repayment%20arrangements%20for%20people%20in%20mortgage%20difficulty&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/mortgage-arrears/alternative-mortgage-repayment-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Consumer protections for people with mortgage problems_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/)

Mortgage lenders must adhere to codes of conduct when dealing with customers.
Find out more.

1440.7096

  * [ _Educational arrangements for Travellers_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/educational-arrangements-for-travellers/)

This document provides information on the arrangements in place for the
education of Traveller children

1157.3452

  * [ _Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

1120.551

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

