**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ GP and hospital services
](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/) > Charges for hospital
services

#  Charges for hospital services

  * Who can use public hospitals in Ireland? 
  * Are public hospitals free in Ireland? 
  * Charges for going to an emergency department 
  * Out-patient services 
  * Charges for in-patients 
  * Charges for mental health services 

##  Who can use public hospitals in Ireland?

If you live in Ireland and you are [ ordinarily resident ](/en/health/health-
system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) you can access in-patient and
out-patient services in public hospitals. Public hospitals include HSE
hospitals and voluntary hospitals.

[ Certain visitors to Ireland are also entitled to public health services
](/en/health/health-system/health-services-and-visitors-to-ireland/) , for
example, people covered under EU Regulations.

##  Are public hospitals free in Ireland?

Public in-patient and day service fees were abolished on 17 April 2023. This
means that the daily charge for staying in hospital for public patients no
longer applies from this date.

COVID-19 is a prescribed infectious disease so you do not have to pay
emergency department (A&E) charges or in-patient charges if you are getting
treatment for [ COVID-19
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/covid19/covid19_overview.html) .

If you don’t live in Ireland ( [ ordinarily resident ](/en/health/health-
system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) ) and you do not belong to any
of the groups that can get free health services, you have to pay the full cost
of the bed, whether it is a public bed or a private bed. You also have to pay
the consultant.  

The HSE has the discretion to reduce or waive the charges in cases of
hardship.

##  Charges for going to an emergency department

If you attend an emergency department **without** **being referred** there by
a GP, there is a charge of €100.

**There is no charge if you are referred by a GP** (bring your referral letter
with you).

Emergency department charges do not apply to:

  * Medical card holders 
  * People who are admitted to hospital as an in-patient as a result of attending the casualty department (you may be subject to in-patient charges) 
  * People getting treatment for prescribed infectious diseases, including COVID-19 
  * Children up to 6 weeks of age 
  * Children with illnesses and disabilities as set out in Regulations: “ _mental handicap, mental illness, phenylketonuria, cystic fibrosis, spina bifida, hydrocephalus, haemophilia and cerebral palsy_ ” 
  * Children referred for treatment from child health clinics and school health examinations 
  * People who are entitled to hospital services because of EU Regulations 
  * Women getting [ maternity services ](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-services/)
  * People with Hepatitis C who have a [ Health Amendment Act Card ](/en/health/health-services/blood-and-organ-donation/hepatitis-c-and-health-amendment-act-cards/)
  * Participants in the [ Redress Scheme for Women Resident in Certain Institutions ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/medical-cards/redress-for-women-resident-in-certain-institutions.html)

You will be charged €100 at your first visit to the emergency department for
an illness or accident. If you have to return for further visits to an out-
patient clinic in relation to the same illness or accident, you should not
have to pay the charge again.

###  Injury units

If you have an injury that is not life threatening you can visit an injury
unit. Injury units can treat broken bones, dislocations, sprains, strains,
wounds, scalds and minor burns. [ Read more about when you can visit an injury
unit ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/injuryunits/what-do-we-treat/) .

The charge to attend an injury unit is €75. You do not have to pay the charge
if you have a medical card or if you have a referral letter from a GP.

Check the [ list of injury units
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/3/injuryunits/) , their location,
opening hours and minimum age for treating children.

##  Out-patient services

You can be referred by your family doctor to the **out-patients** department
of a public hospital for specialist assessment by a consultant or their team
or for diagnostic assessments (for example, x-rays, laboratory tests,
physiotherapy).

If you have an out-patient appointment you will not be staying overnight in
the hospital.

###  How much do out-patient appointments cost?

If you are referred by your GP to attend this service as a public patient, you
do not have to pay for this service. If you wish to attend a consultant in a
private capacity, you must pay their fee.

##  Charges for in-patients

###  Public in-patients in public hospitals

If you are a public patient in a public hospital under the care of a
consultant for treatment and you remain overnight, you are receiving
_overnight in-patient services_ .

You can also be an in-patient if you are admitted to the hospital under the
care of a consultant and you do not require the use of a bed overnight and
your discharge from hospital is planned. This is called _day in-patient
services_ .

####  How much do public in-patient appointments cost?

Public in-patient fees were abolished on 17 April 2023. This means that the
daily charge for staying in hospital for public patients no longer applies
from this date.

###  Private in-patients in public hospitals

If you choose to be treated as a private patient of a consultant when you are
admitted to a public hospital, you are charged for the inpatient services.

**How much you are charged as a private patient** depends on the category of
the hospital and (for an overnight stay) according to the type of room you are
in.

You may be able to claim some of the cost back if you have [ private health
insurance ](/en/health/health-system/private-health-insurance/) .

Current rates are:

**Hospital category** |  **Single-occupancy room overnight** |  **Multiple-occupancy room overnight** |  **Day-case**  
---|---|---|---  
Fifth schedule hospitals  |  €1,000  |  €813  |  €407   
Sixth schedule hospitals  |  €800  |  €659  |  €329   
  
These rates apply from January 2014.

You can read more about the current rates of [ private in patient charges on
the HSE website ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/acute-hospitals-
division/patient-care/hospital-
charges/#:~:text=Private%20patients%20in%20public%20or%20voluntary%20hospitals)
.

If you are a private patient, you must pay for the services of the consultant
who is treating you. You must also pay for the services of any other
consultant who is involved in caring for you (for example, the radiation
oncologist or anaesthetist).

###  Long-stay contributions

If you have been in hospital, but not receiving acute in-patient care, for
more than 30 days, you may be charged [ Long-Stay Contributions for
Residential Support Services ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-
people-with-disabilities/long-stay-contributions/) .

##  Charges for mental health services

You have the same entitlement to [ public health services for mental illness
](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-services/) as for any
other illness.

If you are going to a private psychiatric hospitals you will be charged. [
Health insurance companies ](/en/health/health-system/private-health-
insurance/) sometimes treat psychiatric hospital costs differently from
general hospital costs.

The same rules apply to long-term institutional care for psychiatric patients
as to long-term institutional care for other patients.

Out-patient services for mental illness are provided free of charge to
children aged under 16 years.  

_**Page edited:** 17 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/hospital-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Charges%20for%20hospital%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/hospital-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/hospital-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Charges%20for%20hospital%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/gp-and-hospital-services/hospital-
charges/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Water charges for group schemes_ ](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/water-charges-for-group-schemes/)

Existing system of water charging for group schemes.

1435.8547

  * [ _Prescription charges for medical card holders_ ](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/prescription-charges-for-medical-card-holders/)

People with medical cards pay a charge for medicines that they get on
prescription from pharmacies.

1304.3917

  * [ _Water charges for businesses_ ](/en/housing/water-and-coasts/water-charges-for-businesses/)

The current system of water charges for businesses.

1301.6909

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

