**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Owning a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/) > [ Owning your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/home-owners/) > Ground rent on property

#  Ground rent on property

  * What is ground rent? 
  * Can I buy out my ground rent? 
  * How much will it cost? 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is ground rent?

There are 2 types of property ownership in Ireland:

  * Leasehold 
  * Freehold 

If you own the **leasehold interest** in a property, it means that you own the
building and not the land it is on. It also means that your ownership is for a
fixed number of years.

If you own a leasehold property, you must pay a ground rent to your _ground
landlord._ This is the person who owns the ground your property is built on.
Often the ground landlord is your local authority.

If you own the **freehold interest** in a property, it means that you own the
land and buildings. Your ownership is not limited to a fixed number of years
and you do not have to pay ground rent.

###  **Buying or selling a property with ground rent**

When you buy or sell a property, any ground rent will be recorded on the:

  * Previous deeds, if the property is registered with the Registry of Deeds 
  * Folio, if the property is registered with the Land Registry 

[ Tailte Éireann ](https://www.tailte.ie/) manages the Land Registry and the
Registry of Deeds. Read more in our page on [ property deeds
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/property-deeds/) .

##  Can I buy out my ground rent?

If you are buying a property, you may be able to buy out the ground rent once
you’ve bought the property. This will make you the outright owner of your
property. You can buy the ground rent privately or using the [ Ground Rents
Purchase Scheme ](https://www.tailte.ie/en/registration/ground-rents/ground-
rents-purchase-scheme/) .

The amount you pay to buy out the ground rent can be:

  * Agreed with your ground landlord (consent procedure) 
  * Reached through an arbitration procedure 

If you are buying your ground rent out under the Ground Rents Purchase Scheme,
you must use the arbitration procedure to set the amount you pay. You cannot
agree the amount with the ground landlord. Tailte Éireann will do all the
legal work for a fee.

If you buy out your ground rent, Tailte Éireann will issue a Vesting
Certificate. The Vesting Certificate is a new [ title deed to your property
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/property-deeds/) . You should
register this with the Land Registry, to record that your ownership of the
property has changed from leasehold to freehold.

In some circumstances it is not possible to buy out your ground rent. For
example, if it is not in the public interest, or if there is a specific clause
in a lease that prevents it. However, this is rare.

The Tailte Éireann website has an [ FAQ
](https://www.tailte.ie/en/registration/ground-rents/faq/) and more [ detailed
information ](https://www.tailte.ie/en/registration/ground-rents/) about
buying out your ground rent.

##  How much will it cost?

You will have to pay the landlord the agreed price for the freehold title for
the land. This price can be agreed with your landlord, or by using an
arbitration procedure.

You will also have to pay an application fee. This fee is different if you
agree the price with your landlord or use the arbitration procedure.

If you are buying out your ground rent through **consent** , the application
fee is:

  * €30 if you live in the property 
  * €65 if you don’t live in the property 

If you are buying it out using the **arbitration procedure** , the application
fee is:

  * €105 if you live in the property 
  * €195 if you don’t live in the property 

You will also be charged €40 to [ register your Vesting Certificate with Land
Registry ](https://www.tailte.ie/en/registration/ground-rents/ground-rents-
purchase-scheme/guidelines-for-ground-rents-purchase-scheme.html) .

##  Where to apply

###  Ground Rents Office

Tailte Éireann

Chancery Street  
Dublin 7  
Ireland  
D07 T652

**Tel:** 051 303000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.tailte.ie/ ](https://www.tailte.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@prai.ie ](mailto:info@prai.ie)

_**Page edited:** 22 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/home-owners/ground-rent/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Ground%20rent%20on%20property&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/home-owners/ground-rent/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/home-owners/ground-rent/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Ground%20rent%20on%20property&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/home-owners/ground-rent/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Renting your property for short-term lets_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-your-property-for-shortterm-lets/)

Information about the tax implications and planning rules if you are renting
your property or a room in your property to visitors for short-term lets.

1533.6996

  * [ _Renting out a room in your home_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/)

If you rent out a room in your home, you have certain rights and
responsibilities. These are different depending on your home and the type of
accommodation you are renting.

1406.6299

  * [ _Burials and burial grounds_ ](/en/death/practical-arrangements-after-a-death/burials-and-burial-grounds/)

Burial grounds (cemeteries) in Ireland are governed and maintained by local
authorities. Maintenance, management and how to purchase a burial plot.

1217.3496

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

