**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Legal matters
and health ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/) > Types of decision support
arrangements

#  Types of decision support arrangements

  * What is a decision support arrangement? 
  * Summary of the decision support arrangements 
  * Planning ahead 
  * What kind of decisions are included? 
  * Who is a decision supporter? 
  * Search the register of decision support arrangements 
  * Who to contact and further information 

##  What is a decision support arrangement?

You may now, or in the future, have challenges making decisions or lack
capacity to make certain decisions and need support with them. A decision
support arrangement is a type of legal arrangement that can help you.

You must be aged 18 or over to make a decision support arrangement.

##  Summary of the decision support arrangements

You may need different levels of support to make a specific decision at a
specific time. The arrangement depends on your level of capacity, present and
future, and the type of decision.

If you are currently facing difficulties making decisions, or may in the near
future, 3 decision support arrangements are available. These are tiered from
needing some support with decisions to having decisions made on your behalf.

###  Decision-making assistance agreement

If you need support when making some of your own decisions, you can make a [
decision-making assistance agreement ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-
health/decision-making-assistance-agreement/) . In this agreement, you choose
somebody you know and trust to be your decision-making assistant. They will
help you get information and to understand it, so you can make specified
decisions for yourself.

###  Co-decision-making agreement

If you find it difficult to make certain decisions on your own, or may be
shortly unable to do so, you can make a [ co-decision-making agreement
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/co-decision-making-agreement/) . In this
agreement, you choose somebody you know and trust to be your co-decision maker
to make specific decisions jointly with you. You will need a doctor and
another healthcare professional to check your capacity and confirm that you
are able to enter into this agreement.

###  Decision-making representation order

If you can’t make certain decisions on your own or with somebody else’s
support, the Circuit Court may appoint a [ decision-making representative
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-representative-order/)
to make certain decisions for you. The court does this in a decision-making
representation order. The court will notify the Decision Support Service and
send them a copy of your decision-making representation order.

##  Planning ahead

If you are planning ahead for a time when you may not be able to make certain
decisions yourself, you have 2 types of future planning arrangements
available.

###  Advance healthcare directive

You can make a written statement about the type of medical or surgical
treatment you want or do not want, if in the future you are unable to make
these decisions. This is called an [ advance healthcare directive
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/advance-care-directives/) (AHD). You
must have capacity to make an AHD. As part of an AHD, you can choose someone
you know and trust as your designated healthcare representative to act on your
behalf, advising healthcare workers of the decisions you made in the
directive. You are not obliged to nominate a designated healthcare
representative if you make a AHD.

###  Enduring power of attorney

You can make an [ enduring power of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-
of-attorney/) if you do not currently have capacity issues, but would like to
plan ahead for a time when you may no longer have capacity. This is an
arrangement where you appoint someone you trust as your attorney. Their job is
to act on your behalf to make certain decisions if you are unable to in the
future. An enduring power of attorney cannot cover healthcare matters, as
these must be dealt with in an advance healthcare directive. You or your
attorney, on your behalf, must register the agreement with the [ Decision
Support Service ](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/) . They keep a register
of enduring power of attorneys.

##  What kind of decisions are included?

The decisions you include in an [ enduring power of attorney
](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/) , a [ decision-making
assistance agreement ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-
assistance-agreement/) or [ co-decision-making agreement ](/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/co-decision-making-agreement/) can be about 2 different
aspects of your life:

  * Your personal welfare 
  * Your property and money matters 

Your personal welfare could include decisions on your accommodation,
employment, education or training, social activities, healthcare (but not
decisions about treatment) and well-being. You can make an [ advance
healthcare directive ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/advance-care-
directives/) to outline the medical treatment you would prefer in the event
that you can no longer communicate your wishes.

Your property and affairs could include the control, management, buying,
selling, mortgaging, of some or all of your property or possessions or your
property rights.

Your money matters could include your business, taxes, trade, contracts,
social welfare.

##  Who is a decision supporter?

A decision supporter is somebody who can help you to make certain, specific
decisions. The level of decision-making support is defined by the type of
decision-support agreement you have and what is written in it.

Talk to those you trust about who could act as a suitable [ decision supporter
](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/services/decision-supporters) for your
arrangement.

The Decision Support Service have [ 13 codes of practice for decision
supporters ](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/resources/codes-practice) ,
interveners and relevant professionals, These documents will give guidance on
their role and responsibilities under the Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity)
Act 2015.

##  Search the register of decision support arrangements

The Decision Support Service will keep a register of decision support
arrangements.

Not everyone will be able to search the register. Access will be limited to
certain organisations, people in certain professional bodies that have been
approved by the Decision Support Service and some members of the public who
can show they have a legitimate interest.

The Decision Support Service will keep a searchable register of:

  * [ Co-decision-making agreements ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/co-decision-making-agreement/)
  * [ Decision-making representation orders ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/decision-making-representative-order/)
  * [ Enduring powers of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/)

They will also keep a record of everybody who asks to search a register.

Read more about [ searching the register
](https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie/services/search-register) on the
Decision Support Service website.

The register will only become active on the Decision Support Service website
once searchable arrangements are registered, [ check this update for more
information ](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/news-events/update-searching-
register) .

##  Who to contact and further information

The Decision Support Service (DSS) has information and [ videos for people
making decision support arrangements ](https://decisionsupportservice.ie/news-
events/families-and-assisted-decision-making-capacity-act) .

The DSS have also provided a list of [ important terms used in assisted
decision- making ](https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie/resources/key-terms)
.

You can read [ A Guide to the Legal Aspects of Caring
](https://familycarers.ie/media/3013/a-guide-to-the-legal-aspects-of-
caring.pdf) and the [ Practical Guide for Family Carers on the Assisted
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
](https://familycarers.ie/media/3012/a-practical-guide-for-family-carers-on-
the-assisted-decision-making-capacity-act-2015.pdf) from Community Law and
Mediation and Family Carers Ireland.

If you or your family would like more information, you can contact the
Decision Support Service information team using the contact details below.

###  Decision Support Service

Waterloo Exchange,  
Waterloo Road, Dublin 4  
Eircode: D04 E5W7  
Republic of Ireland

**Tel:** 01 2119750

**Homepage:** [ https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie
](https://www.decisionsupportservice.ie)

**Email:** [ queries@decisionsupportservice.ie
](mailto:queries@decisionsupportservice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 19 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/decision-support-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Types%20of%20decision%20support%20arrangements&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/decision-support-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/decision-support-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Types%20of%20decision%20support%20arrangements&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/legal-
matters-and-health/decision-support-
arrangements/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Judicial review of public decisions_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/judicial-review-public-decisions/)

Administrative decisions may be judicially reviewed by the High Court to
determine whether they are illegal. Find out how to initiate judicial review
proceedings.

1500.4495

  * [ _International protection decisions and appeals_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/if-your-application-for-refugee-status-is-refused/)

This page describes the appeals process in the event that you do not get a
declaration as a refugee.

1365.0789

  * [ _How to support or object to a planning application with a local authority_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/commenting-on-planning-application/)

It is possible for anyone to support or object to a planning application with
a local authority. Find out how to make a submission or observation.

1259.7458

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

