**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Housing ](/en/housing/) > [ Planning
permission ](/en/housing/planning-permission/) > How to support or object to a
planning application with a local authority

#  How to support or object to a planning application with a local authority

  * Introduction 
  * Where can I find planning applications? 
  * How can I comment on a planning application? 
  * What can I comment on? 
  * What can I do if I am not happy with the decision? 
  * How much does it cost to make a submission? 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Anyone has the right to see a planning application made to a local authority.
You can also make a submission or observation on the application for €20.
Generally, the submission or observation must be made within 5 weeks of when
the local authority received the planning application.

##  Where can I find planning applications?

People who are applying for planning permission must put up a site notice and
advertise in a local newspaper that circulates in the area.

Local authorities must prepare weekly lists of planning applications and make
them available for inspection in their offices and public libraries for at
least 8 weeks.

You can also view planning applications on your [ local authority's website
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

You can see all the documents submitted with a planning application. These are
kept at the offices of your local authority.

##  How can I comment on a planning application?

You must make comments about planning applications in writing to the local
authority where the application was made. You may be able to do this on your
local authority's website.

If possible, you should quote the planning application's reference number. You
must also give your:

  * Name 
  * Address 
  * Phone number 
  * Email address (if you have one) 

###  What happens when your comments are received?

Your submission or observation must be acknowledged by the local authority.

The local authority cannot make a decision on an application until they have
had it for 5 weeks. This is so people have time to view and comment on the
application.

When the local authority decides on the planning application, you must be
informed of their decision within 3 days of them making it.

If your submission is received after the deadline, it will be returned to you
along with your fee. You will also be contacted by your local authority to
tell you that your submission can't be considered. The deadline for commenting
on a planning application is 5 weeks from when the local authority received
the planning application.

There are different rules if you want to [ support or object to a planning
application or planning case that is with An Bord Pleanála
](/en/housing/planning-permission/how-to-make-an-observation-on-a-strategic-
infrastructure-development-with-an-bord-plean%C3%A1la/) .

##  What can I comment on?

Your comments must be based on planning considerations, not on personal likes,
dislikes or grievances. Planning considerations include:

  * National and regional guidelines and ministerial directives 
  * Policies and objectives of the development plan 
  * Policies and objectives of any local plan 
  * Local considerations such as site development density, parking provision, traffic hazards, overlooking, effects on residential amenity 
  * Public health 
  * Environmental, amenity and shopping impacts 
  * Other material planning matters 

Any comments or observations you make on a planning application are public.

If you make allegations against a person or organisation in your comments,
this could be seen as defamatory and you could be sued.

##  What can I do if I am not happy with the decision?

If you made a submission or observation that has been acknowledged by the
local authority, you have the right to [ appeal its planning decision to An
Bord Pleanála ](/en/housing/planning-permission/appealing-planning-permission-
decision/) .

You also have the right to be informed of any other appeals that have been
lodged to An Bord Pleanála and to receive a copy of the appeal.

An Bord Pleanála has easy-to-read guides with information on [ making a
planning appeal (pdf)
](https://www.pleanala.ie/getmedia/c48973a7-c3cc-4348-94ed-02532921439b/Making-
a-planning-appeal-EN.pdf?ext=.pdf) and [ making an observation on a planning
appeal (pdf).
](https://www.pleanala.ie/getmedia/fe8819fe-6b65-4914-ad00-1332ef9af174/Making-
an-Observation-on-a-Planning-Appeal-EN.pdf?ext=.pdf)

##  How much does it cost to make a submission?

The fee for making a submission or observation on a planning application to a
local authority is €20.

##  More information

For more information, you can contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) .

_**Page edited:** 11 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/commenting-on-planning-
application/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=How%20to%20support%20or%20object%20to%20a%20planning%20application%20with%20a%20local%20%20authority&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/commenting-on-planning-application/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/commenting-on-planning-
application/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=How%20to%20support%20or%20object%20to%20a%20planning%20application%20with%20a%20local%20%20authority&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/planning-
permission/commenting-on-planning-application/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to make an observation on a strategic infrastructure development with An Bord Pleanála_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/how-to-make-an-observation-on-a-strategic-infrastructure-development-with-an-bord-plean%C3%A1la/)

It is possible for anyone to see and make an observation on applications for
planning permission for major infrastructure developments with An Bord
Pleanála. Find out how to make an observation.

2066.2307

  * [ _How to appeal a planning permission decision_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/appealing-planning-permission-decision/)

Outlines the circumstances in which you can appeal a planning decision and how
to make an appeal.

2025.0591

  * [ _Buying or inheriting a local authority home_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/buying-or-inheriting-a-local-authority-home/)

Schemes for local authority tenants to buy their homes at a discount as well
ways in which you might inherit one..

1691.5425

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

