**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health system
](/en/health/health-system/) > Health services for visitors to Ireland

#  Health services for visitors to Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Irish citizens who are living outside Ireland 
  * Visitors from the UK 
  * Visitors from the EU/EEA and Switzerland 
  * Visitors from countries outside the EU, EEA, Switzerland or UK 
  * Students from countries outside the EU, EEA, Switzerland or UK 
  * Asylum seekers and refugees 
  * People coming from Ukraine under the Temporary Protection Directive 
  * People who are not entitled to free or subsidised health services 

##  Introduction

If you are visiting Ireland, you may be entitled to health services that are
free or subsidised, depending on your circumstances. This page explains what
public health services you can access in Ireland as a visitor.

Your [ entitlement to health services ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-
to-public-health-services/) is mainly based on residency and means, rather
than on your payment of tax or [ Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI)
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-
insurance/) . There are some exceptions and these are described below.

If you come to live, work or study in Ireland and intend to stay for at least
one year or retire to Ireland, you are likely to be regarded as living here (
_ordinarily resident_ is the legal term) and to come under the rules as
described in [ Entitlement to health services ](/en/health/health-
system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) .

Some visitors to Ireland are not entitled to free or subsidised public health
services except in cases of hardship. For example, visitors from outside the
EU/EEA, Switzerland and the United Kingdom (UK). In general, if they have to
use health services, they must pay the full cost of those services.

You can access [ videos in 17 different languages from the Health Service
Executive ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/mhml/) that give information on
health topics such as how the Irish health system works, accessing different
types of health care, free health services, and information on pregnancy, new-
born and maternal health.

##  Irish citizens who are living outside Ireland

If you have been living and working in another EU/EEA country or Switzerland,
your entitlement to health services when you return is decided under the [
rules that apply to EU nationals ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-
abroad/european-health-insurance-card/) , (see ‘Visitors from the EU/EEA and
Switzerland’ below).

If you are an Irish citizen living in the UK and visiting Ireland, you can get
medical care if you become ill or have an accident during your visit. You may
need to show proof of your UK residency such as a passport or driver's
licence.

If you have been abroad on a short-term contract, you are still considered
ordinarily resident in Ireland.

If you have been resident abroad for up to three years but your [ Local Health
Office ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/lho/) is satisfied that you
did not establish an entitlement to health services in any other country, the
HSE may regard you as ordinarily resident in Ireland if you need treatment
when you return. This is so that people who emigrate from Ireland do not lose
their health service eligibility on residence grounds before they establish
eligibility elsewhere.

This provision does not apply if you are covered by EU regulations in another
country. This provision does not entitle a person temporarily resident in
another EU country to have the HSE extend the European Health Insurance Card
beyond the normal period.

##  Visitors from the UK

If you are a UK citizen, you have access to healthcare under the [ Common
Travel Area ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/common-travel-area-
between-ireland-and-the-uk/) while visiting Ireland. This arrangement has not
been affected by the UK leaving the EU. You can bring evidence of your UK
citizenship.

UK residents can access necessary healthcare when visiting Ireland. You can
show any of the following as proof of UK residency:

  * UK-issued Global Health Insurance Card (GHIC) or [ European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-abroad/european-health-insurance-card/)
  * UK driving licence 
  * Northern Ireland voter’s card or medical card 
  * UK biometric residence permit 
  * 2 documents showing your UK address (for example bank statement or utility bill) issued within 6 months 

You will need to show photo ID if the document you present does not have a
photo.

##  Visitors from the EU/EEA and Switzerland

If you are visiting Ireland, you can use a valid [ European Health Insurance
Card ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-abroad/european-health-insurance-
card/) issued by your home country to access healthcare.

If you have an EHIC, you can get necessary medical treatment in Ireland free
of charge. EHIC only covers public healthcare, not private. You should bring
your European Health Insurance Card with you when you are travelling to
Ireland.

Certain categories of people, such as posted workers, are eligible for medical
cards under EU rules – see the further information section on [ medical cards
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) .

##  Visitors from countries outside the EU, EEA, Switzerland or UK

If you are visiting from outside the EU, EEA, Switzerland or UK, you do not
have any entitlement to free or subsidised health services. You may wish to
consider taking out travel insurance.

If you can show the HSE that you intend to live in Ireland for at least a
year, you will be regarded as [ ordinarily resident ](/en/health/health-
system/entitlement-to-public-health-services#l2b820) and will be eligible for
either free or subsidised health services. The HSE may look for evidence that
you are legally entitled to live here for at least a year.

Your dependents must show that they also intend to live here for at least a
year to be regarded as ordinarily resident in Ireland. They are not
automatically regarded as ordinarily resident based on your eligibility.

##  Students from countries outside the EU, EEA, Switzerland or UK

If you are a student from a country outside the EU, EEA, Switzerland or the
UK, you are generally regarded as [ ordinarily resident ](/en/health/health-
system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) if you are registered for a
course of study that will last for at least one academic year.

If you are here for a shorter period, you are regarded as a visitor and you do
not have any entitlement to free or subsidised health services.

##  Asylum seekers and refugees

If you are an asylum seeker living in direct provision, you are entitled to a
[ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/)
while your application for international protection is being considered.

If you get [ refugee status, subsidiary protection or permission to remain,
](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/) then you are regarded as
ordinarily resident and you come under the [ usual rules for entitlement to
health services ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-
services/) .

##  People coming from Ukraine under the Temporary Protection Directive

Everyone [ coming to Ireland from Ukraine ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-
and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine/)
under the Temporary Protection Directive can get the same public healthcare
services as people who live in Ireland.

You are also entitled to a [ medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-
visit-cards/medical-card/) . A medical card allows you to visit a doctor for
free, access other health services and get medicines at a reduced price.

You should apply for your medical card using a special [ medical card
application form (pdf) ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/healthcare-in-
ireland/medical-card-form-mc1-u-form-ukrainian.pdf) for people from Ukraine.

You can read more information on health care and medical cards for Ukrainian
refugees on our page [ coming to Ireland from Ukraine ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-
ireland-from-ukraine/) .

Read about the Irish health system and health services [ in Ukrainian and
Russian on the HSE website ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/healthcare-in-
ireland/english/ukrainian-nationals.html) .

##  People who are not entitled to free or subsidised health services

If you are not ordinarily resident in Ireland and you are not entitled to
health care under any of the circumstances described above, you may have to
pay the full cost for any services provided. In cases of hardship, the HSE may
provide urgent necessary treatment at a reduced charge or without charge.

_**Page edited:** 14 October 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/health-services-and-visitors-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Health%20services%20for%20visitors%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/health-services-and-visitors-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/health-services-and-visitors-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Health%20services%20for%20visitors%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/health-services-and-visitors-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Health services when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/accessing-healthcare-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

Find out how to access the Irish healthcare system as a returning Irish
emigrant.

1946.8809

  * [ _Entitlement to health services_ ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/)

Describes the entitlement to public health services of people resident in
Ireland.

1802.5839

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

1704.6833

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

