**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ COVID-19
](/en/health/covid19/) > Self-isolation for COVID-19

#  Self-isolation for COVID-19

  * Introduction 
  * When do I need to self-isolate? 
  * How long do I self-isolate for? 
  * What do I do after self-isolating? 

##  Introduction

**Self-isolation** means staying at home and completely avoiding contact with
other people.

You no longer need to restrict your movements, but you must self-isolate if
you develop symptoms or test positive for COVID-19.

If you are at high risk from COVID-19, you should continue to follow public
health advice to [ protect yourself from COVID-19
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/preventing-the-spread/protect-
yourself-and-others/) and use your own judgement to stay safe in public and
crowded places.

##  When do I need to self-isolate?

You need to self-isolate if you have [ symptoms of COVID-19
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/symptoms/overview/) or you get a
positive [ COVID-19 test ](/en/health/covid19/testing-for-covid19/) result
(PCR or antigen).

###  Do I need to get tested for COVID-19?

Most people no longer need to get tested. Your GP or a healthcare worker will
tell you [ if you need to take a test. ](/en/health/covid19/testing-for-
covid19/)

##  How long do I self-isolate for?

If you have **tested positive for COVID-19** (PCR or antigen test), you should
stay at home for 5 days from when your symptoms started. If you have no
symptoms, stay at home for 5 days from the date of your test. You can leave
home after 5 days if your symptoms have fully or mostly gone for the last 48
hours.

You should self-isolate as soon as you notice symptoms of COVID-19 or get a
positive COVID-19 test result (PCR or antigen test).

If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and got a negative PCR or antigen test result
**or** you did not take a test but have symptoms, you should self-isolate
until 48 hours after your symptoms end.

###  If your child has COVID-19

If your child tests positive for COVID-19 or has symptoms, they need to
isolate until both apply:

  * They have not had a high temperature or other symptoms for 48 hours 
  * Itâ€™s been 3 days since they developed symptoms 

###  Close contacts without symptoms

If you are a [ close contact ](/en/health/covid19/contact-tracing/) of
somebody who has COVID-19, look out for [ symptoms of COVID-19
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/symptoms/overview/) . Close contacts
with no symptoms of COVID-19 do not need to self-isolate or restrict
movements.

If you have been in close contact with someone with COVID-19, you [ do not
need to test for COVID-19 ](/en/health/covid19/testing-for-covid19/) .

###  **How to self-isolate**

You should stay at home and completely avoid contact with other people.

If you have COVID-19 and have scheduled a COVID-19 vaccine or booster
appointment, you should postpone this until after you have recovered. [ Check
how long you should wait to get your vaccine after getting COVID-19
](https://www2.hse.ie/screening-and-vaccinations/covid-19-vaccine/get-the-
vaccine/going-to-a-vaccination-centre/) .

##  What do I do after self-isolating?

When you stop self-isolating after 5 days, you should avoid contact with [
people at higher risk from COVID-19
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/covid19/people-at-higher-
risk/overview/#conditions-that-put-you-at-higher-risk) for a further 5 days
(10 days after testing positive).

_**Page edited:** 25 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/covid19-isolation-
and-restricting/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Self-
isolation%20for%20COVID-19&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/covid19-isolation-
and-restricting/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/covid19-isolation-
and-restricting/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Self-
isolation%20for%20COVID-19&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/covid19/covid19-isolation-
and-restricting/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Finding somewhere to live when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/finding-somewhere-to-live-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to find accommodation when you return to
Ireland.

1027.2987

  * [ _Public health measures for COVID-19_ ](/en/health/covid19/public-health-measures-for-covid19/)

This document describes the key public health measures in Ireland against
COVID-19.

873.2366

  * [ _Self-employed and unemployment_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-unemployment/)

If your business has closed, or if you are self-employed but have less work
and less income than before, you may qualify for a social welfare payment.

810.10895

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

