**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Health ](/en/health/) > [ Health services
](/en/health/health-services/) > [ Cancer services ](/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/) > BowelScreen: The National Bowel Screening
Programme

#  BowelScreen: The National Bowel Screening Programme

  * Introduction 
  * The BowelScreen test 
  * How to register for BowelScreen 
  * Contact details 

##  Introduction

BowelScreen is the National Bowel Screening Programme which offers free bowel
screening to people aged 59 to 69 every 2 years.

Bowel screening aims to detect signs of bowel cancer at an early stage, where
there are no symptoms.

####  How much does the test cost?

The test is free and is done by you at home. You need to be on the bowel
screening register to be sent an invitation to receive a home screening test
kit. See ‘ [ How to register for BowelScreen ](/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/bowelscreen#lbfb48) ’ below.

Contact your GP if you have any [ symptoms of bowel cancer
](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/bowel-
cancer/?gclsrc=aw.ds&gclid=Cj0KCQiAosmPBhCPARIsAHOen-
Mr3YAazmeDkwCVxjtiqdY1DLaAYyKfb25yIdOyYFz0gfQ9DwwotPwaAtxHEALw_wcB) . Never
ignore symptoms, even if you have had a recent normal screening result.

##  The BowelScreen test

You will be sent a screening test kit that includes step-by-step instructions
for self-administration of the test at home. The HSE will post the free test
to you.

You then send the completed test back to BowelScreen using the pre-paid
envelope provided. Your test results will be sent to you within 4 weeks. If
you have registered your GP details, they will also receive a copy of your
results.

If you [ get an abnormal result from your sample
](https://www2.hse.ie/screening-and-vaccinations/bowel-screening/bowel-
screening-information.html#after) , you’ll be offered a colonoscopy
appointment.

##  How to register for BowelScreen

Bowel cancer screening is available to all people aged 59 to 69 living in
Ireland.

BowelScreen puts together a register of people eligible for screening from
details supplied by the Department of Social Protection, General Medical
Services and private health insurance providers. However, some people are not
included on any of these lists.

If you haven’t received an invitation for bowel screening, you can [ check if
you are on the register online ](https://apps.bowelscreen.ie/bowel-
screening/verify-you-are-registered-with-
bowelscreen.609.cbsregistrationpublic.html?_ga=2.175137956.702499547.1642944254-1056890493.1611917890&_gac=1.249986548.1643304152.Cj0KCQiAosmPBhCPARIsAHOen-
Mr3YAazmeDkwCVxjtiqdY1DLaAYyKfb25yIdOyYFz0gfQ9DwwotPwaAtxHEALw_wcB) or by
calling Freephone 1800 45 45 55. If you are not on the register, you can [
register for bowel screen online ](https://apps.bowelscreen.ie/bowel-
screening/verify-you-are-registered-with-
bowelscreen.609.cbsregistrationpublic.html?_ga=2.175137956.702499547.1642944254-1056890493.1611917890&_gac=1.249986548.1643304152.Cj0KCQiAosmPBhCPARIsAHOen-
Mr3YAazmeDkwCVxjtiqdY1DLaAYyKfb25yIdOyYFz0gfQ9DwwotPwaAtxHEALw_wcB) or add
your details over the phone.

##  Contact details

###  BowelScreen

The National Bowel Screening Programme  
King's Inn House  
200 Parnell Street  
Dublin 1

**Tel:** 1800 45 45 55

**Homepage:** [ http://www.bowelscreen.ie/ ](http://www.bowelscreen.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@bowelscreen.ie ](mailto:info@bowelscreen.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/bowelscreen/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=BowelScreen%3A%20The%20National%20Bowel%20Screening%20Programme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/bowelscreen/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/bowelscreen/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=BowelScreen%3A%20The%20National%20Bowel%20Screening%20Programme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
services/cancer-services/bowelscreen/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Cervical Cancer Screening_ ](/en/health/health-services/cancer-services/cervical-screening-programme/)

Find out about the Cervical Screening Programme and how to check if you are
registered for screening.

882.7098

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

869.1443

  * [ _Early Start Pre-School Programme_ ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-childcare/early-start/)

Early Start is a programme designed to boost educational achievement among
disadvantaged three- and four-year-old children.

803.62537

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

