**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Witnesses
](/en/justice/witnesses/) > Remote hearings and video link evidence

#  Remote hearings and video link evidence

  * Introduction 
  * Remote hearings in civil cases 
  * Video link evidence in criminal cases 
  * Remote hearing of criminal appeals 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Traditionally, almost all court hearings were conducted in courtrooms with all
participants being physically present. Witnesses were required to attend to
give oral evidence except in limited circumstances. Video link evidence was
permitted in limited circumstances in criminal cases under the [ Criminal
Evidence Act 1992
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1992/en/act/pub/0012/sec0013.html) .

The [ Civil Law and Criminal Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2020
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2020/act/13/enacted/en/html) now allows
for a much wider use of remote hearings than has been the case to date. It
also extends the use of video link evidence in a number of criminal matters.

Remote hearings involve some or all of the participants logging in to an
online platform where the case is otherwise conducted as it would physically
in court. If the judges or barristers are not in the courtroom, they will not
be wearing robes or wigs.

Remote hearings and video link evidence are not suitable for all types of case
and protections have been provided to ensure that no one will be unfairly
prejudiced by a remote hearing or video link evidence.

##  Remote hearings in civil cases

The Act allows the President of the relevant Court to designate categories of
civil case for hearing remotely. In addition, a party can ask or the judge can
decide to hear part or all of any case remotely. However, where a remote
hearing is decided by a judge to be unfair to any of the parties or contrary
to the interests of justice, the decision to hear it remotely will not apply.

Those taking part in remote hearings will continue to benefit from the same
protections as if they were in physical attendance in court and the court will
have the same powers.

It is an offence to frustrate the participation of any person in a remote
hearing or to interfere with the technology being used. It is also an offence
to make any recording of the proceedings.

Penalties include a maximum fine of €5,000, 12 months’ imprisonment or both,
if convicted in the District Court, or a maximum fine of €50,000, 3 years’
imprisonment or both, if convicted in a higher court.

##  Video link evidence in criminal cases

If you are giving evidence by video link you don’t need to go into the
courtroom. Instead you can sit in another room or venue and give your evidence
by live video link. A television monitor is placed in the court, which
transmits your image, and you have a screen in your room that transmits the
image of what is happening in the courtroom.

In criminal proceedings, there are certain situations where video link
evidence has been acceptable for a number of years. These include:

  * If the proceedings involve a sexual or violent offence, the victim and any other witness may be allowed to give their evidence by live video link, if they are under 18 years of age, or for any other reason that [ the judge ](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) allows 
  * If the judge thinks it is necessary to protect the victim from further victimisation, the victim can give evidence by live video link 

When a child gives evidence by live video link, the judge and the barristers
do not wear wigs or gowns in court. The judge can decide to let an
intermediary (for example, a social worker) ask the witness questions. The
questions should be asked in a way that is appropriate for the age and mental
ability of the witness.

From 14 September 2020, additional uses of video link evidence were
introduced:

  * The types of hearings permitted to be conducted by video link were widened to include arraignments (where an accused is asked to enter a plea), returns for trial, sentencing hearings and certain hearings in relation to extradition. Criminal trials are still conducted physically. 
  * These hearings also cover persons not in custody, allowing any accused person to attend by video link where the court so directs. A court can also decide that some applications may be heard by video link by default. The accused must either be legally represented, have obtained legal advice or have been given the opportunity to obtain legal advice before video link can be used. 
  * If hearing the evidence using video link is prejudicial to the accused or contrary to the interests of justice, or if adequate video link facilities are not available or otherwise inappropriate, the application will be dealt with in the traditional, physical manner. 
  * A witness, other than the accused, may also be allowed to give evidence remotely over video link in these criminal applications, even if they are not in the State. 

Those taking part in such applications in criminal cases will continue to
benefit from the same protections as if they were in physical attendance in
court and the court will have the same powers.

##  Remote hearing of criminal appeals

The Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court now have the power to direct that
any criminal appeal before it be held remotely. Again, where a remote hearing
is unfair to any of the parties or contrary to the interests of justice, the
decision to hear it remotely will not apply.

Similarly, it is an offence to interfere with the participation of any person
in a remote appeal or to interfere with the technology being used. It is also
an offence to make any recording of the proceedings.

Penalties include a maximum fine of €5,000, 12 months’ imprisonment or both,
if convicted in the District Court or a maximum fine of €50,000, 3 years’
imprisonment or both, if convicted in a higher court.

##  Further information

For more detailed information, you should get legal advice. You can access
detailed information on [ how to get legal advice and representation in court
](/en/justice/civil-law/representation-in-court#l600ba) .

_**Page edited:** 4 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/remote-
hearings-and-video-link-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Remote%20hearings%20and%20video%20link%20evidence&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/remote-
hearings-and-video-link-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/remote-
hearings-and-video-link-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Remote%20hearings%20and%20video%20link%20evidence&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/remote-
hearings-and-video-link-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Documentary evidence_ ](/en/justice/evidence/documentary-evidence/)

Documentary evidence is evidence that contains a record of some kind. What
does this include and how is this evidence admissable in court?

1195.8907

  * [ _Rural transport and Local Link services_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/rural-transport-and-local-link-services/)

Information about Local Link buses linking towns and villages in rural Ireland
and other rural transport options available.

1114.3496

  * [ _Package holidays and linked travel arrangements_ ](/en/consumer/travel/package-holidays/)

Find out about your rights when entering into a contract to buy a package
holiday.

1099.9708

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

