**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Children and
young offenders ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/) > Anti-social
behaviour by children

#  Anti-social behaviour by children

  * Introduction 
  * What is anti-social behaviour? 
  * Anti-social behaviour warning 
  * What happens after a child gets a behaviour warning from Gardaí? 
  * What is a good behaviour contract? 
  * What is a behaviour order (ASBO)? 
  * Can a child get legal aid for a behaviour order (ASBO)? 
  * If you are affected by anti-social behaviour 

##  Introduction

The Garda Síochána have the power to deal with anti-social behaviour in a
number of ways. They can:

  * Issue anti-social behaviour warnings to children 
  * Convene meetings to discuss a child’s anti-social behaviour 
  * Request a child and their parents or guardian to enter into a good behaviour contract and 
  * Apply to the courts for an anti-social behaviour order in respect of a child (commonly known as an ASBO) 

Provisions for dealing with anti-social behaviour by children aged between 12
and 18 years were introduced by Part 13 of the [ Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0026/index.html)

The intention of these laws is to allow the Gardaí to deal effectively with
anti-social behaviour.

##  What is anti-social behaviour?

###

A child’s behaviour to someone who does not live with them is anti-social if
it causes or, in the circumstances, is likely to cause them:

  * Harassment or 
  * Significant or persistent alarm, distress, fear or intimidation, or 
  * Significant or persistent impairment of their use or enjoyment of their property 

Examples of anti-social behaviour are:

  * Intimidation 
  * Abusive or threatening behaviour 
  * Vandalism. 

###

##  Anti-social behaviour warning

###

###  **What is an anti-social behaviour warning?**

A Garda can issue an anti-social behaviour warning to any child who has
behaved in an anti-social manner.

The Garda may issue the behaviour warning verbally to the child. It must also
be served in writing on the child and their parents or guardian. The written
notice must include the following:

  * A statement that the child has behaved in an anti-social manner 
  * The type of behaviour and when and where it took place 
  * A demand that the child cease the behaviour 
  * A notice that, if the child does not cease the behaviour, an application may be made to the court for an anti-social behaviour order (ASBO) 

The Garda Síochána must give the behaviour warning within 1 month of the
behaviour taking place.

In the case of persistent anti-social behaviour, the warning must be issued
within 1 month of the most recent known instance of that behaviour taking
place.

###  **How long does a behaviour warning stay in force?**

A behaviour warning will remain in force against a child for 3 months from the
date it is issued. If the child persists in the type of behaviour specified in
the warning during the 3 months, an application may be made to the court for
an ASBO (read more about ASBOs below).

###

##  What happens after a child gets a behaviour warning from Gardaí?

###

###  Behaviour meeting with Gardaí

After giving a behaviour warning to a child, the Garda can make a report to
the garda superintendent in charge of the district, outlining the concerns
about the child’s behaviour.

The garda superintendent organises a meeting to discuss that child’s behaviour
if:

  * The superintendent is satisfied that the child has behaved in an anti-social manner and is likely to continue doing so, and 
  * The child has previously behaved in an anti-social manner but: 
    * The child has not received a warning in respect of previous anti-social behaviour, or 
    * Holding a meeting would hope to prevent further such behaviour by the child 

###  Who attends a behavioural meeting?

The superintendent asks the following people to attend the meeting to discuss
the child’s behaviour:

  * The child 
  * The child’s parents or guardian 
  * The Garda who issued the anti-social behaviour warning to the child 
  * If the child is already involved in [ the Garda Youth Diversion Programme ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/garda-youth-diversion-programme/) , a Juvenile Liaison Officer 
  * Anyone else who it is considered would be of assistance to the child or the child’s parents or guardian 

###  **What happens at the meeting?**

At the meeting, the superintendent explains to the child and the parents or
guardian in simple language what the offending behaviour is and the effect it
is having on anyone else.

The child is asked to acknowledge that their behaviour took place and to
undertake to stop it. The parents or guardian are also asked to acknowledge
the child’s behaviour and to undertake to take steps to prevent the behaviour
from continuing.

If the child and the parents or guardian agree to give these undertakings, the
superintendent prepares a document known as a _good behaviour contract_ .

###

##  What is a good behaviour contract?

###

A good behaviour contract sets down in writing the undertakings or promises
given by the child and parents or guardian at the meeting. It is signed by
both the child and the parents or guardian.

The good behaviour contract remains in force for a maximum period of 6 months
from the date of the meeting, but it may be extended for a further 3 months at
the request of the child and the parents or guardian.

###  What happens if a child breaks the agreement in the good behaviour
contract?

If a child behaves in breach of the agreement made in the contract, the garda
superintendent may organise another meeting to renew the contract if the child
and parents or guardian agree to do so.

If, however, the superintendent does not believe that another meeting would
help to prevent anti-social behaviour by the child concerned, the
superintendent may either:

  * Recommend that the child be admitted to the Juvenile Diversion Programme, or 
  * If satisfied that the child’s participation in the Juvenile Diversion Programme would not be appropriate, apply to the [ Children Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/children-court/) for a behaviour order in respect of the child. 

The superintendent can also recommend admitting the child to the diversion
programme or applying for a behaviour order:

  * If the child or the parents or guardian refuse at the first meeting to sign a good behaviour contract, or 
  * If the superintendent decides at the start that calling a meeting would not help to prevent anti-social behaviour by the child. 

###

##  What is a behaviour order (ASBO)?

###

An anti-social behaviour order or ASBO is an order which stops a child 12
years or older from doing anything specified in the order.

An ASBO is issued by the Children Court when a member of the Garda Síochána
(not below the rank of superintendent) applies to the court.

Before the Court makes such a behaviour order it must be satisfied that:

  * Even though the child has signed the good behaviour contract or participated in the meeting with the Gardaí, the child has continued to behave in an anti-social way and is likely to continue to do so 
  * An order is necessary to prevent the child from continuing to behave in that way 
  * The order is reasonable in the circumstances, taking into account the effect or likely effect of that behaviour on other people 

It is open to the court to impose whatever terms or conditions it considers
appropriate in the order.

###  **What conditions can be included in a behaviour order?**

For example, the court might include a condition that the child must not come
within 50 metres of a certain house where they had been causing annoyance or
it may order the child to stay away from a certain shopping centre.

The court may also require the child to comply with certain requirements
relating to attending school or, indeed, reporting to a garda, teacher or
other person in authority.

###  How long does a behaviour order last?

A behaviour order issued by the Children Court stays in place for a maximum of
2 years from the date of the order.

The court has the authority, however, to change or end the order if an
application to do so is made by the child concerned, their parents or
guardian, or by a member of the Garda Síochána not below the rank of
superintendent.

###  Can a child appeal against a behaviour order?

Yes, a child against whom a behaviour order has been made can, appeal against
the order to the [ Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) .
They must appeal within 21 days from the date the order was made.

If the child or the parents or guardian intend to appeal the order, they must
give notice of the appeal to the garda superintendent in charge of the
district where the child lives.

###  Are there any offences relating to behaviour warnings?

When a Garda decides to issue a behaviour warning to a child, the Garda may
need the child to give their name and address for the purpose of the behaviour
warning or the written record of it.

If the child fails to give a name and address or gives a name and address that
is false or misleading, then the child is committing an offence and can be
charged and convicted in the Children Court to a [ class E fine
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/) .

###  Are there any offences relating to behaviour orders?

If a child, without reasonable excuse, does not comply with the behaviour
order, they are guilty of an offence and can be convicted.

If the child is convicted, they can receive a [ class D fine
](mailto:http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal_law/criminal_trial/maximum_fines_on_summary_conviction.html)
or be [ sentenced to detention ](/en/justice/children-and-young-
offenders/detention-of-children/) in Oberstown Children Detention Campus for
up to 3 months, or both.

If a child is convicted of breaching a behaviour order and is ordered to pay a
fine and the costs of the proceedings, the total of the fine and the costs
must not be more than €1,500.

###

##  Can a child get legal aid for a behaviour order (ASBO)?

###

The child may be granted a certificate for free legal aid, which is known as a
[ Legal Aid (Behaviour Order) Certificate ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-
advice/criminal-legal-aid-certificates/) . This legal aid will also be
available if the child decides to appeal against the making of the order.

If a child is brought to the Children Court and is not eligible for free legal
aid, then the child or the child’s parents or guardian must pay for any legal
representation on behalf of the child.

##  If you are affected by anti-social behaviour

If you are affected by anti-social behaviour, you should contact [ your local
Garda station ](https://www.garda.ie/en/Contact-Us/Station-Directory/) . You
should supply as much information as possible about the behaviour.

_**Page edited:** 23 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Anti-
social%20behaviour%20by%20children&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Anti-
social%20behaviour%20by%20children&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-
children/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Anti-social behaviour by adults_ ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/anti-social-behaviour-by-adults/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 has provisions dealing with anti-social
behaviour by adults. These provisions allow gardaí to deal with anti-social
behaviour through a civil process using behaviour warnings and orders or
ASBOs.

3629.7356

  * [ _Anti-social behaviour and rent arrears in social housing_ ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-rent-arrears-in-social-housing/)

Local authorities can evict tenants who are engaging in anti-social behaviour
or are in rent arrears..

3215.5679

  * [ _Children and the criminal justice system_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/)

The Children Act 2001 regulates the treatment of children found in breach of
the criminal law.

1521.972

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

