**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Arrests
](/en/justice/arrests/) > Questioning and surveillance by Gardaí

#  Questioning and surveillance by Gardaí

  * Garda powers for questioning and surveillance 
  * When a Garda stops you in public 
  * Surveillance by Gardaí 
  * Your rights with surveillance and recording 
  * Further information 

##  Garda powers for questioning and surveillance

When the [ Gardaí ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-
police-force/) are investigating and detecting crime they are entitled to
observe the actions of members of the public.

Gardaí must act in accordance with the law when questioning members of the
public. The Gardaí are given certain powers to stop and question the public.

If a Garda is investigating a criminal offence, they are entitled to seek the
co-operation of anyone by asking the person questions about what they saw or
heard.

There is generally no legal obligation to answer any such questions or to co-
operate with the Gardaí.

##  When a Garda stops you in public

###  Common law powers

Most of the powers given to the Gardaí to stop and question members of the
public are set out in legislation (known as statutory powers). However, there
are a number of instances where a Garda is entitled to stop and question you
where no statutory power exists. This is known as a _common law power_ .

An example of this would be where a Garda observes you acting suspiciously
late at night in an area where a lot of crimes are being committed. The Garda
is entitled to stop you to detect and prevent crime. You are under no legal
obligation to co-operate with the Garda and the Garda cannot use force to
restrain your freedom under common law, short of [ arresting
](/en/justice/arrests/arrests/) you.

###  **Do I you** **have to give a Garda my name and address?**

If the Garda has reasonable grounds for suspecting that you committed certain
offences, the Garda can demand your name and address. If you refuse to give
this information, then the Garda can arrest you.

###  **Do you have to stop your car for a Garda?**

The Gardaí have a common law power to stop motorists at random in order to
detect and prevent crime. This can be used, for example, to stop cars near
pubs to identify drunk drivers or to check cars passing through an area where
a lot of crime had been committed.

You must also stop your vehicle when required to do so by a Garda under [
Section 109 of the Road Traffic Act 1961
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1961/en/act/pub/0024/sec0109.html#zza24y1961s109)
. They can stop you if they are inspecting vehicle tax, insurance
certificates, driving licenses and road worthiness of vehicles.

###

###  **Do you have to answer questions when stopped by a Garda?**

There are many laws that allow the Gardaí to stop you for certain purposes.
One law which specifically permits a Garda to stop and question you, short of
arresting you, is [ section 30 of the Offences Against the State Act 1939
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/questioning-and-
surveillance/#zza13y1939s30) .

Section 30 gives the Gardaí the power to stop you as a suspect in a public
place. It also gives them the power to stop any vehicle, or any ship, boat or
other vessel for the purposes of questioning and searching, and if necessary,
arresting the suspect.

##  Surveillance by Gardaí

The Gardaí regularly use surveillance on people and locations to detect and
prevent crime. Surveillance is used in a number of situations.

If, for example, you are suspected of being involved in criminal activities
you may be placed under surveillance. Similarly, when the Gardaí have
information that a crime is to be committed at a certain location, they may
decide to place that premises or location under surveillance. The decision to
place a person or premises under surveillance is primarily one for the Gardaí
but must be made within the law.

###  **Use of recording devices by the Gardaí**

The Gardaí have authority to use recording devices in public places or any
other place they are entitled to be under the [ Garda Síochána (Recording
Devices) Act 2023
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2023/act/32/enacted/en/html) as
commenced by [ S.I. 215/2024
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/215/made/en/print) .

Different types of recording devices can be used by Gardaí, including:

  * Body worn cameras 
  * Smartphones 
  * Dashcams 
  * Cameras on garda animals (such as dogs or horses) 
  * Drones. 

Gardaí can use recording devices where necessary and proportionate for the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences and
for public order purposes.

If the Gardaí are using body worn cameras, these cameras cannot be hidden. The
camera must be visible and the camera must also indicate when it is on.

If a Garda is using any recording device in someone’s home, the people present
should be notified by the Garda.

From 31 May 2024, the Gardaí will [ pilot the use of body worn cameras
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/7917c-frontline-gardai-commence-use-of-
bodyworn-cameras/) in up to 5 police stations. The pilot will follow a [ Code
of Practice on the use of body worn cameras
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/216/made/en/print) .

###

###  **Secret surveillance authorisation**

Secret surveillance to combat serious criminal, subversive or terrorist
activity can be conducted under the [ Criminal Justice (Surveillance) Act 2009
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/special-
criminal-court/) . The Act provides for a procedure where judges can authorise
such surveillance. It also has a complaints procedure.

###  **Can the gardaí listen to my phone calls and search my post?**

It is a criminal offence for anyone to intercept a telephone call, letter or
package addressed to someone else, if they don’t have legal authorisation to
do so.

The Gardaí have the power to use technology to keep people under surveillance.
These powers are under the [ Interception of Postal Packets and
Telecommunications Messages (Regulation) Act 1993
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1993/act/10/enacted/en/print) .

###  **Minister’s authorisation for surveillance**

The interception of phone calls and opening of postal letters and packages can
also be authorised by the [ Minister for Justice
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/Our_ministers) . Only the Garda
Commissioner can apply to the Minister to authorise this in relation to
criminal offences.

If the offence is in relation to state security, the Garda Commissioner and
the Chief of Staff of the Defence Forces (Army) can apply for authorisation.

A judge of the [ High Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/arrests/) is
responsible for monitoring the operation of any interception of phone calls or
packages to ensure the intercepts are only confined to those authorised by the
Minister.

##  Your rights with surveillance and recording

###  **Right not to be stalked or harassed**

Everyone in Ireland enjoys a general freedom to observe the movements of
others and, indeed, to observe the property of others. While this is true, the
manner of such observations cannot be such as to cause alarm or distress to
another person.

[ Section 10 of the Non-fatal Offences Against the Persons Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0026/sec0010.html#zza26y1997s10)

You have a legal protection from being _stalked_ or harassed. However, this
protection does not prevent lawful surveillance by the Gardaí conducted in an
appropriate manner.

###  **Constitutional right to privacy**

Everyone has a fundamental [ constitutional right to privacy ](/en/government-
in-ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-rights/) .
Surveillance by neighbours, spouses, private investigators, or stalkers can
potentially breach this right to privacy.

###  **Data Protection**

You are protected from unjustified surveillance under [ the General Data
Protection Regulation
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1961/en/act/pub/0024/sec0109.html) .

###  **Access to Garda records**

You can make a [ request to the Garda Síochána for a copy of any personal data
](/en/justice/law-and-rights/access-to-garda-records/) that it has about you.
In certain circumstances, the Gardaí can refuse access.

##  Further information

The Irish Council for Civil Liberties provide a [ Know your rights - Criminal
Justice & Garda Powers (pdf) ](https://www.iccl.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/ICCL_KYR_Justice_2014_LR.pdf%22%20/t%20%22_blank) that
covers arrest and other garda powers.

Read more about your rights if you have been arrested and are being [
interviewed by the Garda Síochána.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/garda-
interviews/%22%20/t%20%22_blank)

Check what happens when a [ suspect in a criminal investigation makes a
statement
](http://suspect%20in%20a%20criminal%20investigation%20makes%20a%20statement/%22%20/t%20%22_blank)
or [ makes a confession
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/confessions/) .

Read about your [ right to silence in criminal cases
](/en/justice/arrests/right-to-silence-in-criminal-cases/) .

Read about the [ powers of search
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/powers-of-search/) by
Gardaí.

Read about how to [ access certain information about you on Garda records
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-and-rights/access-to-
garda-records/) .

_**Page edited:** 31 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/questioning-
and-surveillance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Questioning%20and%20surveillance%20by%20Garda%C3%AD&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/questioning-
and-surveillance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/questioning-
and-surveillance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Questioning%20and%20surveillance%20by%20Garda%C3%AD&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/questioning-
and-surveillance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1771.5303

  * [ _Maternity care and the public health nurse_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/maternity-care-and-public-health-nurse/)

A description of the postnatal care provided by your public health nurse.

1751.9913

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1726.4568

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

