**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Law
enforcement ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/) > Adult Cautioning Scheme

#  Adult Cautioning Scheme

  * What is the Adult Cautioning Scheme? 
  * How is a caution decided? 
  * Procedure for adult cautioning 
  * Schedule of offences 

##  What is the Adult Cautioning Scheme?

If you are an adult (aged over 18) and charged with certain criminal offences,
you may be given a caution instead of being prosecuted.

The Adult Cautioning Scheme may be available if there is evidence that the
person has committed a specific offence and the gardaí believe that
prosecuting the offence is not in the public interest.

Adult cautions may not be disclosed in [ Garda vetting reports
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/data-protection-at-work/garda-vetting/) or [ police certificates
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-
ireland/police-certificate/) . However, cautions are disclosed if you are
later convicted of an offence.

The scheme can only be used if you are charged with the specific criminal
offences listed below.

##  How is a caution decided?

If you are suspected of committing one of the criminal offences covered by the
Scheme, the decision to give a caution (rather than prosecute you) is made by
the local Garda Superintendent (or a Garda Inspector who is acting as the
local Superintendent). When deciding to make a make a referral or give a
caution, the Gardaí must consider:

  * Your alleged behaviour 
  * The surrounding circumstances 
  * Evidence of your guilt 
  * Your understanding of what a caution is and its significance 
  * The public interest 
  * The views of the victim 

**What is the public interest?**

The decision to give a caution instead of prosecution is a serious decision.
The Garda Superintendent must be satisfied that the offence is appropriate for
a caution. The Gardaí must also consider whether the caution is in the public
interest – does it benefit or harm the public as a whole?

**Is the offence listed in the Schedule of Offences**

The offence must be included in the schedule of offences for the Scheme.
Gardaí must also look at the particular circumstances in which you committed
the offence. If the public interest doesn't require a prosecution in those
circumstances, then you may be cautioned.

**The Gardaí consider the offenders circumstances**

Gardaí will consider how suitable you are for the scheme. For example, if the
Gardaí believe that you would be deterred from similar behaviour in the future
if a caution is given, then it is more likely to be used. Adults without any
previous convictions are often considered suitable candidates. If you have a
recent history of offending, you are unlikely to be considered suitable for an
adult caution.

**The Gardaí consider the details of the offence**

They must consider specified details of certain offences. For example, if the
offence is simple possession of cannabis or cannabis resin contrary to [
Section 3 of Misuse of Drugs Act 1977
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1977/act/12/section/3/enacted/en/html) ,
the Gardaí also must consider the type, quantity and value of the drug and
whether in all the circumstances the offence amounts to simple possession.

**What about the victim?**

The Gardaí must get the views of any victim, if possible, before deciding
whether to administer a caution. If the victim thinks a caution should not be
given, any reasons the victim gives must be carefully considered by the Garda
Superintendent before the decision is made.

However, a caution can be given by the Garda Superintendent even if the victim
is opposed to it. In such cases, the Gardaí may ask for advice from the [
Director of Public Prosecutions ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/director-of-
public-prosecutions/) before making a decision to caution.

**Compensation** **to the victim**

If you offer compensation to the victim, the offer may support a decision to
give a caution.

However, the decision to caution does not depend on the offer of compensation
alone. The Gardaí do not become involved in recommending compensation by the
offender to the victim.

##  Procedure for adult cautioning

###  **Adult Caution Referral form**

When a garda believes you may be suitable for a caution, the garda fills out
an Adult Caution Referral Form.

As the offender, you are then told by the member in charge of the garda
station in plain language about the Adult Cautioning Scheme.

If you understand the adult cautioning procedure and you agree to be
considered for the Scheme, you are asked by the garda to sign Part E of the
Referral Form. This signature is witnessed by the Gardaí.

The member in charge of the Garda Station sends the Referral Form to the
Superintendent with their views and recommendations. The Superintendent then
can decide to:

  * Administer a caution 
  * Refuse a caution 

Or

  * Refer the matter to the Director of Public Prosecutions for direction 

You will be told that you can seek legal advice before agreeing or refusing a
caution under the Scheme. If the offender wants to get legal advice, they must
do so promptly.

**Giving the caution**

A Garda Superintendent or a Garda Inspector, who is acting as the
Superintendent, gives the caution.

You will be cautioned in a Garda station. You must agree in writing that:

  * You accept the caution, and 
  * You accept that the caution will be recorded and will be made known to a court if you have any subsequent conviction for any criminal offence. 

**When does the** **adult caution happen and how long does it last?**

The member in charge of the garda station arranges a suitable time and place
for the Superintendent to give the caution. When the caution is given, a copy
of the completed Adult Caution Referral Form is given to you, the offender.

The entire procedure from detecting the crime to giving the caution is carried
out as soon as possible, within days rather than months.

**Can I get a second caution?**

The idea of the caution is that it should only be applied **once** to an
offender, but it may (only in the most exceptional circumstances) be given to
someone who has previously been cautioned.

Examples of exceptional circumstances include:

  * Where the subsequent offence is a very minor one 
  * Where there has been a long gap in time since the first caution and the Superintendent believes that a second caution after such a time lapse would benefit the person 

If a Superintendent decides to give a second or subsequent caution to any
person, then the Gardaí must first get the permission of the [ Director of
Public Prosecutions ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/director-of-public-
prosecutions/) .

##  Schedule of offences

The list of offences which are eligible for the Adult Cautioning Scheme are as
follows:

###  Criminal Justice (Public Order) Act 1994

[ Section 4: Intoxication (being drunk) in a public place
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0004.html#zza2y1994s4)

[ Section 5: Disorderly conduct in a public place
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0005.html)

[ Section 6: Threatening, abusive or insulting behaviour in a public place
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0006.html)

[ Section 8: Failure to comply with a direction (order) of a Garda
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0008.html)

[ Section 9: Wilful obstruction (deliberate obstruction)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0009.html)

[ Section 11: Entering a building etc. with intent to commit an offence
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0011.html)

[ Section 13: Trespass on a building etc. in a manner likely to cause fear
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/13/enacted/en/html#sec13)

[ Section 21: Failure to comply with crowd control restrictions
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/21/enacted/en/html)

[ Section 22: Surrender and seizure of alcohol
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0022.html) .

###  Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act 2001

[ Section 4: Theft
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2001/en/act/pub/0050/sec0004.html#partii-
sec4) (where the value of the property doesn't exceed €1000)

[ Section 8: Making off without payment
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2001/act/50/section/8/enacted/en/html#sec8)
(where the value of the payment is less than €1,000)

[ Section 17: Handling stolen property
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2001/act/50/section/17/enacted/en/html#sec17)
(where the value of the property concerned is less than €1,000)

[ Section 18: Possession of stolen property
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2001/act/50/section/18/enacted/en/html#sec18)
(where the value of the property concerned is less than €1,000)

###  Intoxicating Liquor Act 2003

[ Section 6: Offences by a drunken person
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/act/pub/0031/sec0006.html#partii-
sec6)

[ Section 8: Disorderly conduct
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/act/pub/0031/sec0008.html)

###  Non Fatal Offences Against The Persons Act 1997

[ Section 2: Assault - minor assaults
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0026/sec0002.html#zza26y1997s2)
(Assaults on members of the Gardaí are forwarded to the Director of Public
Prosecutions for consideration)

###  Criminal Damage Act 1991

[ Section 2: Damaging property
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1991/en/act/pub/0031/sec0002.html#zza31y1991s2)
where the value of the property damaged is less than €1,000

[ Section 3: Threat to damage property
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1991/en/act/pub/0031/sec0003.html)

###  Misuse of Drugs Act 1977

[ Section 3: Possession of cannabis or cannabis resin
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1977/act/12/section/3/enacted/en/html#sec3)

###  Casual Trading Act 1995

[ Section 3: Casual trading without or in breach of licence
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/act/19/section/3/enacted/en/html#sec3)

###  Intoxicating Liquor Act 1927

[ Section 17: Persons on licensed premises during prohibited hours
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1927/act/15/section/17/enacted/en/html#sec17)

###  Licensing Act 1872

[ Section 12: Public Drunkenness
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1872/act/94/section/12/enacted/en/html)

###  Dublin Police Act 1842

[ Section 14(12): Nuisances in Public thoroughfares
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1842/act/24/section/14/enacted/en/html)
(applies to Dublin Metropolitan (Court) District Only)

###  Summary Jurisdiction (Ireland) Amendment Act 1871

[ Section 8: Offensive or riotous conduct in a theatre or other place of
public amusement
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1871/act/76/section/8/enacted/en/html)
(applies to Dublin Metropolitan (Court) District only)

_**Page edited:** 21 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/adult-cautioning-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Adult%20Cautioning%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/adult-cautioning-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/adult-cautioning-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Adult%20Cautioning%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/adult-cautioning-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Anti-social behaviour by adults_ ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/anti-social-behaviour-by-adults/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 has provisions dealing with anti-social
behaviour by adults. These provisions allow gardaí to deal with anti-social
behaviour through a civil process using behaviour warnings and orders or
ASBOs.

1306.8997

  * [ _Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/)

Information about Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

1262.9135

  * [ _How to apply for your first Irish passport as an adult_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/passports/applying-for-or-renewing-an-irish-passport/)

A guide to making your first passport application if you are age 18 or over.

1166.8228

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

