**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Probation and
welfare services ](/en/justice/probation-and-welfare-services/) > Probation
Service

#  Probation Service

  * What is the Probation Service? 
  * Assessing offenders for the courts 
  * Supervising offenders in the community 
  * The Probation Service in prisons 
  * Probation services for young people 
  * Victims of crime and restorative justice 
  * Contact 

##  What is the Probation Service?

The Probation Service is the lead State agency for assessing and managing
offenders (people convicted of an offence) in the community.

The Probation Service works with offenders and others to:

  * Reduce offending 
  * Support rehabilitation 
  * Make communities safer 

##  Assessing offenders for the courts

If you are in court for a criminal offence and you plead guilty or are found
guilty, the [ judge
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) can ask the
Probation Service to complete an assessment report before deciding on your [
sentence ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/) .

There are [ 2 types of assessment reports
](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/WebPages/WP16000033) :

  * Pre-sanction report (also known as a probation report) 
  * Community service report 

The judge can request one, or both, of these reports. The case is adjourned
until the report is ready to be presented to the court.

The Probation Service can only make a recommendation in its report. The judge
will [ decide how to proceed with the case
](http://probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000087) .

Generally, assessment reports are completed within 8 weeks for adults and
within 4 weeks for young people.

###  **Pre-sanction report (or probation report)**

If a pre-sanction report is requested, you will be assessed to see if you are
suitable for a non-prison sentence.

This report will include detailed information about you, including:

  * Personal and family circumstances 
  * Your attitude towards the crime you have committed 
  * Whether you accept responsibility for your actions 
  * Whether you are an alcoholic or drug addict 
  * Information that shows you are committed to improving your behaviour (for example, attending a drug treatment clinic) 
  * Anything in your life that might indicate a risk of reoffending 

The report may also suggest conditions for a non-prison sentence. For example,
that you should move away from a residential area where you were getting into
trouble or that you must attend treatment for an addiction.

###  **Community service report**

If a community service report is requested, you will be assessed to see if you
are suitable to do unpaid work in the community instead of going to prison.

The Probation Service can only recommend a community sanction where they
believe that you can be supervised in a community setting without risk of
reoffending.

You can read more about [ assessment of offenders for probation
](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/WebPages/WP16000033) .

##  Supervising offenders in the community

[ Supervising offenders ](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/WebPages/WP16000059)
in the community is the main part of the Probation Service’s work.

###  **Probation order**

The judge may decide to grant a **probation order** to place you under the [
supervision of the Probation Service
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000059) in the community.

When placed on probation supervision, you must keep in regular contact with
your probation officer and obey all conditions of the order. A probation order
will not last longer than 3 years.

###  **Community service**

If the court decides that you can serve your sentence in the community rather
than in prison, they may grant a **community service order** . This allows you
to do unpaid work in the community instead of going to prison.

To be eligible for [ community service
](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/WebPages/WP16000055) , you must be 16 or over
and your sentence must be 12 months or less.

The judge will tell you:

  * How many hours of work you must complete (between 40 and 240 hours) 
  * The prison sentence that will be imposed if you do not complete the work 

The Probation Service organises the work placement and is responsible for
informing the court if you do not complete the work.

###  **Community Return Scheme**

Under the [ Community Return Scheme
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000037) , you can complete unpaid
community work as a condition of early release from your prison sentence.

Prisoners are assessed by the Probation Service and the [ Irish Prison Service
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/) to see if they are suitable for the scheme.

To be eligible, you must:

  * Be assessed as posing no threat to the community 
  * Be serving a sentence that is more than 1 year but less than 8 years 
  * Have served at least 50% of your sentence 

You must work on the days assigned for an agreed length of time. The work
usually takes place near the end of your sentence.

####  **Post-release supervision of sex offenders**

If you are a sex offender, you can be sentenced to a period of supervision
following your release from prison. This is called a [ post-release
supervision order ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/#f7425c) .

You are monitored by the Probation Service when you are released to ensure
that you comply with the conditions of the order.

####  **Prisoners on temporary release**

If you are on [ temporary release
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-system/being-released-
from-prison/#1e38a8) from custody, the Probation Service supervises you until
your period of release has ended.

Life sentence prisoners are normally supervised for the rest of their lives.

####  **Suspended sentence**

A judge may also suspend all or part of your prison sentence for a specified
period of time, on condition that you stay under the supervision of a
probation officer for that time.

####  **Working with other community services**

The Probation Service also partners with [ other services
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000050) in the community to:

  * Reduce offending 
  * Support rehabilitation 
  * Develop local responses to crime 
  * Improve public safety and social inclusion 

This involves work in areas such as drugs, homelessness and domestic violence.

Probation Service staff refer offenders to [ community projects
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000065) around Ireland, to help them
to reintegrate and resettle.

###  **Probation services for homeless people**

If you are an offender who is or has been homeless, the [ Probation Service
can link you to organisations
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000064) in the community that can
help you deal with issues like addiction, abuse and isolation.

If you are under probation supervision, they can also help you access
services, including accommodation.

##  The Probation Service in prisons

The Probation Service works with a prison-based team, including the prison
governor and other services. If you are a prisoner, they will help you manage
your sentence and settle back into the community.

The Probation Service also prepares assessment reports on:

  * Prisoners, for the [ Parole Board ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-system/being-released-from-prison/)
  * People remanded in custody while awaiting trial, for the courts 

You can read more about [ the Probation Service and their work in prisons
(pdf)
](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/0/87AE63E992C26D8980258022004B6544/$File/Prisons+Update+Leaflet.pdf)
.

###  **Repatriation of prisoners**

The Probation Service provides assessment reports on prisoners from abroad who
are being considered for transfer to their country of origin. This is required
in applications under the [ Transfer of Sentenced Persons Acts 1995
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0016/index.html) and [ 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0041/index.html) .

##  Probation services for young people

Young Persons Probation is a [ specialised division of the Probation Service
](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/WebPages/WP16000038) .

They will work with you if you are aged between 12 and 18 and you:

  * Appear before the courts, or 
  * Are in a child detention school 

Detaining a child who is convicted of a crime is considered as a last resort.
The Probation Service is involved in supervising several of the [ community
sanctions available under the Children Act 2001
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-and-young-
offenders/community-sanctions/) .

You can read the Probation Service’s [ child safeguarding statement
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP18000028) .

##  Victims of crime and restorative justice

The Probation Service has a [ Restorative Justice and Victim Services Unit
(pdf)
](http://www.probation.ie/EN/PB/0/8DDCE88FF78C7079802583CA0057E431/$File/Victim%20Services.pdf)
which provides information and support to victims of crime.

You can read about how the Probation Service works with victims of crime in
Section 10 of [ the Victims Charter (pdf) ](https://www.victimscharter.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2024/05/Victims-Charter.pdf) .

The Probation Service also prepares victim impact reports for the courts when
required. These reports assess the impact that offences have had on [ victims
of crime ](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims_of_crime/) ,
usually violent crime.

###  **Restorative justice**

The restorative justice service allows victims to meet or communicate with
offenders to describe how the crime has affected them.

You can read more about [ how restorative justice works in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-and-welfare-
services/restorative-justice/#lca011) .

##  Contact

You can find [ contact details for local Probation Services
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/officecontactspage?readform) on the Probation
Service website.

###  Probation Service

Haymarket  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 WT27  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 817 3600

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 872 2737

**Homepage:** [ http://www.probation.ie/ ](http://www.probation.ie/)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/officecontactspage?readform
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/officecontactspage?readform)

**Email:** [ psinfo@probation.ie ](mailto:psinfo@probation.ie)

_**Page edited:** 19 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-
and-welfare-services/probation-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Probation%20Service&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-
and-welfare-services/probation-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-
and-welfare-services/probation-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Probation%20Service&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-
and-welfare-services/probation-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Occupational therapy services_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/occupational-therapy-services/)

Occupational therapy services in Ireland are designed to help people of all
ages achieve the maximum degree of independence in ordinary living.

1192.1584

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1106.8108

  * [ _Tusla - the Child and Family Agency_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/tusla-the-child-and-family-agency/)

Tusla - the Child and Family Agency - is the State agency responsible for
improving the well-being and outcomes for children.

986.80115

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

