**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Witnesses
](/en/justice/witnesses/) > Hostile witness

#  Hostile witness

  * Introduction 
  * Who is declared a hostile witness? 
  * Procedure followed when a witness is declared hostile 
  * What happens if I am declared a hostile witness? 

##  Introduction

A hostile witness is a [ witness ](/en/justice/witnesses/types-of-witnesses/)
who appears to be refusing to fully testify in support of the person who
called them or testifies in a way that significantly differs from their pre-
trial statement.

The person who calls you as a witness expects you to provide the court with
evidence similar to what you may have said in a pre-trial statement. If you
refuse to answer questions or contradict what you said before, the person who
called you can apply to the [ judge ](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) to have
you declared a hostile witness.

A hostile witness can have their credibility called into question and can be
cross-examined and asked leading questions by the person who called them. The
person who called you may also use the process in an attempt to persuade you
to give evidence that agrees with your previous statement.

##  Who is declared a hostile witness?

If the evidence you give under oath changes significantly from what you said
earlier in a pre-trial statement or if you refuse to answer questions which
you could be expected to answer in a particular manner, the solicitor or
barrister who called you to be a witness can ask the judge to decide if you
are hostile. This application must be made to the judge without the [ jury
](/en/justice/courtroom/jury/) present.

The judge has to decide whether you are a hostile witness or an unfavourable
witness. Just because you give unhelpful or unfavourable evidence does not
mean the person calling you can attack your credibility.

##  Procedure followed when a witness is declared hostile

While the jury is not present the solicitor or barrister applies to the judge
to have the witness declared hostile. If they are making the application on
the basis of a pre-trial statement then they show that to the judge.

If the judge rules that the witness can be treated as a hostile witness
because of a prior inconsistent statement, then the jury is brought back in
and it is put to the witness that any pre-trial statement is significantly
different from, or contradicts the evidence they have given in the witness
box.

If the witness denies this, then the Garda who took the statement normally
goes into the witness box and proves to the judge that the statement was made
(without revealing the contents of the statement).

After this, if the witness continues to deny the contradiction, then the pre-
trial statement is read into evidence. It is read to the jury as proof that
the witness made a contradictory or different statement to the evidence they
offered while in the witness-box. The judge must make it clear to the jury
that what the witness has said in the prior statement is not evidence of the
facts in the statement, but only evidence relating to the credibility of the
witness, unless [ section 16 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/26/section/16/enacted/en/html)
is also being invoked. Section 16 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006 gives a
judge the power to admit a pre-trial statement as evidence of the facts
contained in that statement, even though the witness later refuses to give
evidence, denies making the statement, or contradicts it.

The [ statement can only be admitted ](/en/justice/witnesses/admissibility-of-
witness-statements-in-a-criminal-trial/) if the court is satisfied that:

  * The witness made it 
  * It was made voluntarily 
  * It is reliable 
  * The facts would be admissible if the witness gave testimony about them in court 
  * The witness signed an affirmation that the statement was the truth (e.g. a statutory declaration), or the court is satisfied that the witness understood that they must tell the truth 

##  What happens if I am declared a hostile witness?

Normally, if a solicitor or barrister calls you as a witness, they cannot
attack your credibility or cross-examine you as if you were a witness for the
other side. They also cannot generally ask questions about, or introduce
evidence of any prior inconsistent statements. The calling barrister cannot
ask leading questions either in an attempt to get you to say what they want.

If the judge decides you are a hostile witness, the barrister calling you can:

  * Cross-examine you on the statement you made before the trial 
  * Ask leading questions in an effort to get you to say what they want 

If you are cross-examined on your previous statement, that statement is
generally only used as evidence of your inconsistency, it is not automatically
evidence of the facts contained in the statement. However, it may be possible
for the person who called you to have that statement allowed as evidence of
the facts contained in it.

For more detailed information you should seek legal advice.

_**Page edited:** 27 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/hostile-
witness/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Hostile%20witness&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/hostile-
witness/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/hostile-
witness/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Hostile%20witness&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/hostile-
witness/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Being a witness_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/being-a-witness/)

This document describes what is involved in being a witness in a court case
and witness expenses.

1545.6886

  * [ _Types of witnesses_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/types-of-witnesses/)

Page describing the different types of witnesses that can be called in a court
of law in Ireland.

1539.4688

  * [ _Witnesses under 18 years old_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/witnesses-under-18-years-old/)

Rules about how witnesses under 18 years of age can give evidence in the
District Court, the Circuit Court or the Central Criminal Court.

1507.989

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

