**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Courts system
](/en/justice/courts-system/) > Legal Services Regulatory Authority

#  Legal Services Regulatory Authority

  * Introduction 
  * Members of the LSRA 
  * The functions of the LSRA 
  * Making a complaint 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Legal Services Regulatory Authority (LSRA) is responsible for the
regulation of legal practitioners (solicitors and barristers) in Ireland. It
was established in 2016 under [ the Legal Services Regulation Act 2015
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/65/enacted/en/html) . The LSRA
is independent in the performance of its functions.

The LSRA has a statutory responsibility to regulate the services of legal
practitioners and to ensure high standards. It investigates complaints against
barristers, solicitors and solicitor’s firms.

##  Members of the LSRA

The LSRA has 11 members, the majority of which are lay members (not solicitors
or barristers), including its Chairperson. The lay members are nominated for
appointment by:

  * The Citizens Information Board 
  * The Higher Education Authority (An tÚdarás um Ard-Oideachas) 
  * Competition and Consumer Protection Commission 
  * Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission 
  * Institute of Legal Costs Accountants 
  * Consumers' Association of Ireland 

The non-lay members are nominated for appointment by:

  * The Bar Council 
  * The Legal Aid Board 
  * The Honorable Society of King’s Inns 
  * The Law Society (2 members) 

You can visit lsra.ie to see the [ current members of the LSRA
](https://www.lsra.ie/about-us/authority-members/) .

##  The functions of the LSRA

The LSRA has a wide variety of functions, including:

  * Establishing and administering a system of inspection of legal practitioners 
  * Receiving and investigating complaints (see ‘Making a complaint’ below) and sanctioning legal practitioners if misconduct is found 
  * Maintaining a public [ Roll of Practising Barristers ](https://www.lsra.ie/for-law-professionals/roll-of-practising-barristers/) \- it is a criminal offence for a practising barrister not to have his or her name entered on the Roll 
  * Promoting public awareness and disseminating information about legal services including their cost 
  * Keeping the Minister of Justice informed of developments relating to the provision of legal services and making recommendations on policies 
  * Undertaking research on the provision of legal services which may promote an improvement in standards of legal services and public awareness 
  * Making recommendations about the education and training of legal practitioners and the structure of the legal profession   

##  Making a complaint

Complaints about solicitors and barristers are dealt with by the LSRA. The
LSRA complaint handling system replaces the previous complaints handling
service provided by the Law Society and the Bar Council of Ireland.

You can make a complaint to the LSRA if you have received a poor legal
service, been charged too much or you believe the legal professional is guilty
of professional misconduct.

Professional misconduct is unethical or unprofessional behaviour that falls
short of the ethical or professional standards accepted by a particular
profession. Examples include dishonesty, taking advantage of your age or
inexperience, acting against your instructions or using insulting, racist or
sexist language.

When the complaint is received the LSRA will notify the legal practitioner
(and the Law Society of Ireland if appropriate). You can read about how to
make a complaint and what you can expect on [ the LSRA website
](https://www.lsra.ie/make-a-complaint/) .

##  Where to apply

###  Legal Services Regulatory Authority

P.O. Box 12906  
Dublin 2

**Opening Hours:** Lines open 10am – 12:30pm

**Tel:** 01 8592911

**Homepage:** [ http://www.lsra.ie ](http://www.lsra.ie)

**Email:** [ complaints@lsra.ie ](mailto:complaints@lsra.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Legal%20Services%20Regulatory%20Authority&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Legal%20Services%20Regulatory%20Authority&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Gambling Regulatory Authority of Ireland_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/gambling-regulatory-authority/)

The Gambling Regulatory Authority will be the new body responsible for the
regulation of the gambling industry.

1951.3276

  * [ _Charities Regulatory Authority_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/charities/charities-regulatory-authority/)

This document describes the role and responsibilities of the Charities
Regulatory Authority.

1611.1049

  * [ _Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/)

Information about the functions of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators.
This used to be called the Office of the Taxing Master.

1534.8595

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

