**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Evidence
](/en/justice/evidence/) > Circumstantial evidence

#  Circumstantial evidence

  * Introduction 
  * Examples of circumstantial evidence 
  * Can circumstantial evidence be admitted in court? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Circumstantial evidence is evidence of facts that the court can draw
conclusions from. For example, if an assault happened on O'Connell Street at
6.15pm, you can give evidence that you saw the accused walking down O'Connell
Street at 6pm. In that situation, you are giving the court circumstantial
evidence. The court can draw conclusions from the fact that the accused was on
O'Connell Street at 6pm, but you have not given evidence about whether the
accused attacked a person.

##  Examples of circumstantial evidence

Common examples of circumstantial evidence include:

  * Evidence that establishes a motive 
  * Evidence of an opportunity to commit the offence 
  * Evidence of the accused’s state of mind when the offence was committed 
  * Evidence of the accused preparing for the crime 
  * Evidence of the accused having items that could be used to commit the offence 
  * Evidence of identification, for example, the accused’s DNA, fingerprints or mobile phone records 
  * Evidence that the accused committed similar crimes around the same time the alleged offence was committed 
  * Evidence of the accused giving different versions of events 

Examples of circumstantial evidence in theft cases include:

  * Evidence of the accused's fingerprints at the scene of the crime 
  * The fact that the accused was found with a large amount of money and was unable to explain why they had it 

Examples of circumstantial evidence in murder cases include:

  * The fact that the accused had an intense dislike of the victim 
  * The fact that the accused behaved in a bizarre and suspicious way after the offence 
  * The fact that the accused lied about their alibi 
  * The fact that the accused was in the area when the offence was committed 
  * The fact that the defendant's blood or [ DNA ](/en/justice/evidence/dna-evidence/) matches blood or DNA found on the victim's body 

##  Can circumstantial evidence be admitted in court?

Generally, circumstantial evidence can be admitted in court. However, the
courts are careful when the only evidence in a case is circumstantial
evidence.

Circumstantial evidence must be examined closely and it should be looked at
together with other evidence. A court would be very slow to convict a
defendant based on one piece of circumstantial evidence, for example, if the
defendant’s fingerprints were found at the scene of the crime but there was no
other evidence.

However, if there are a number of different pieces of circumstantial evidence,
they have more weight when taken together. For example, in a theft case, if
the defendant was seen in the area at the time of the theft, their
fingerprints were found at the scene of the crime and they were found with a
large sum of money that they could not explain, the court would be more likely
to convict.

##  Further information

You should get legal advice for more detailed information on this.

_**Page edited:** 25 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/circumstantial-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Circumstantial%20evidence&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/circumstantial-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/circumstantial-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Circumstantial%20evidence&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/circumstantial-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Evidence that has been collected unlawfully_ ](/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-evidence/)

Evidence that has been collected in deliberate and conscious breach of your
constitutional rights cannot be admitted in courts in Ireland.

1232.8335

  * [ _Documentary evidence_ ](/en/justice/evidence/documentary-evidence/)

Documentary evidence is evidence that contains a record of some kind. What
does this include and how is this evidence admissable in court?

1170.271

  * [ _Real evidence_ ](/en/justice/evidence/real-evidence/)

This document discusses real evidence, which is material, tangible evidence,
such as an object, tape recording, computer printout, photograph or forensic
evidence.

1155.446

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

