**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Evidence
](/en/justice/evidence/) > Evidence that has been collected unlawfully

#  Evidence that has been collected unlawfully

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) guarantees the people of Ireland
certain [ fundamental rights ](/en/government-in-ireland/irish-
constitution-1/constitution-fundamental-rights/) . Sometimes, the Gardaí or
the prosecution in a case can get evidence for a trial in breach of your
fundamental rights. This means that they got the evidence in circumstances
where your constitutional rights have not been respected.

##  Rules

###  Evidence collected in breach of your constitutional rights

Evidence that is collected in a "deliberate and conscious" breach of your
constitutional rights cannot be presented in court, except in exceptional
circumstances. "Deliberate and conscious" means that the Gardaí or officers
involved knew that the evidence was collected in breach of your constitutional
rights.

For example, if Gardaí found evidence when searching your home, knowing they
didn’t have a valid search warrant, they would have collected this evidence in
breach of your constitutional rights.

However, evidence obtained inadvertently in breach of your constitutional
rights may be allowed in court. However, the prosecution must prove that
mistake made was inadvertent.

For example, if Gardaí found evidence when searching your home, not knowing
that there was a minor defect in the search warrant, then this evidence may
possibly be allowed.

###  Evidence collected in breach of non-constitutional law

In some situations, evidence may be obtained in breach of legislation or other
laws but not in breach of the Constitution. This category of evidence is often
called illegally-obtained evidence.

For example, the Constitution does not give the same protection to a business
premises as it does to a home. Nonetheless, the power to search such premises
often has be given by legislation and any search must be conducted in
accordance with that legislation.

If a search is conducted on a business premises not in accordance with the
relevant legislation, any evidence gathered is not automatically inadmissible
in court. It is up to the judge to decide whether to allow the evidence after
considering all the surrounding circumstances.

##  Further information

You should get legal advice for more detailed information on this.

  

_**Page edited:** 21 April 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-
obtained-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Evidence%20that%20has%20been%20collected%20unlawfully&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-
obtained-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-
obtained-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Evidence%20that%20has%20been%20collected%20unlawfully&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-
obtained-evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Circumstantial evidence_ ](/en/justice/evidence/circumstantial-evidence/)

Circumstantial evidence is evidence of facts from which conclusions can be
drawn in a criminal trial in Ireland.

942.93164

  * [ _Tax on income that is not from your employer_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-return-non-paye-income/)

Some PAYE taxpayers have other sources of income. Information about how non-
PAYE income is taxed.

912.5471

  * [ _Documentary evidence_ ](/en/justice/evidence/documentary-evidence/)

Documentary evidence is evidence that contains a record of some kind. What
does this include and how is this evidence admissable in court?

877.7033

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

