**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Arrests
](/en/justice/arrests/) > Extradition to and from Ireland

#  Extradition to and from Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Extradition from Ireland to non-EU Countries 
  * Extradition to and from the UK 
  * Extradition between EU member states- European Arrest Warrant 
  * Irish Legislation on extradition 

##  Introduction

Extradition is the transfer of a person from one country to another so they
can be prosecuted or punished for an offence they have been convicted of.

Extradition is usually only possible if there is an extradition agreement
between the two countries in question.

So, Ireland must have an agreement with the other country before someone can
be extradited to or from Ireland.

Each country has specific rules about extradition. For example, Ireland does
not allow extradition for the purposes of investigation of a criminal offence
only.

Since 2004, extradition between EU member states has been governed by the [
European Arrest Warrant Framework Decision ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32002F0584) . This has been implemented in Ireland
by the [ European Arrest Warrant Act 2003
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/act/pub/0045/index.html) and [ 2012
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2012/act/30/enacted/en/html) and [ 2024
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/act/9/section/29/enacted/en/html) .

Extradition to other countries from Ireland is governed by the [ Extradition
Act 1965 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1965/en/act/pub/0017/index.html) as
amended.

##  Extradition from Ireland to non-EU Countries

You may be extradited from Ireland to countries if Ireland has extradition
agreements where certain conditions are met including:

  * **Dual criminality:** You are charged with an offence that is punishable by imprisonment in Ireland and also in the other country for at least a year. Or, you are convicted of such an offence, and a sentence of at least four months has been imposed. So, the offence must be the same in the two countries. You may not be extradited if you are going to be held in custody for the purpose of investigation. 
  * **Not a political offence** or one connected with a political offence. The definition of political offence was initially quite wide but has now been narrowed considerably. In general, it does not include terrorist type offences. 
  * The death penalty does not apply to the offence. 

###  Process of extradition

The other country that is looking for your extradition from Ireland must apply
for your extradition to the Minister for Justice. All extradition proceedings
are then dealt with by the [ High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-
court/) . The usual rules in relation to criminal trials apply to extradition
proceedings.

If you are an Irish national, you cannot be extradited unless the specific
extradition treaty or arrangement says otherwise. For example, treaties with
the United States and with Australia apply to Irish citizens or nationals.

[ Further information on extradition from Ireland to non-EU countries
](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/282ce-extradition/) is available on
the Department of Justiceâ€™s website.

##  Extradition to and from the UK

When the United Kingdom left the European Union, this meant some of the laws
that were used for extradition between the UK and Ireland stopped applying.

**If you were validly arrested under a European Arrest Warrant before** **11pm
on 31 December 2020** , the European Arrest Warrant regime applies to your
extradition to the UK.

**If you have been arrested for extradition since 11pm on 31 December 2020** ,
the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement continues to allow extradition to
Ireland from the UK and vice versa. This agreement contains similar
extradition rules and procedures to the European Arrest Warrant regime. This
also applies to **pre-31 December 2020** requests for extradition when the
person had not been arrested at that time.

##  Extradition between EU member states- European Arrest Warrant

Since 1 January 2004, a [ European Arrest Warrant (EAW)
](https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/cross-border-cases/judicial-cooperation/types-
judicial-cooperation/european-arrest-warrant_en) valid throughout the EU has
replaced extradition procedures between EU member states.

If you are extradited to or from another EU country, a European Arrest Warrant
may be issued by a national judicial authority if you are accused of an
offence for which the maximum penalty is at least a year in prison or if you
have been sentenced to a prison term of at least four months. The European
Arrest Warrant Procedure also applies to Norway and Iceland, even though they
are not EU member states.

You can only be extradited from Ireland to another EU country for the purposes
of:

  * Being tried for an offence 
  * Serving a custodial sentence or detention order 

You cannot be extradited from Ireland to another EU country to be kept in
custody simply for investigation purposes.

###  Dual criminality for European Arrest Warrants

Dual criminality is when there are similar offences under the laws of both
states. Until January 2004, dual criminality was required for all offences if
you were to be extradited.

Since January 2024, dual criminality is not needed for extradition between EU
member states if you have committed certain major offences which are listed in
the European Arrest Warrants Act 2003 including:

  * Participation in a criminal organisation 
  * Terrorism 
  * Trafficking in human beings 
  * Sexual exploitation of children and child pornography 
  * Trafficking in arms 
  * Ammunition and explosives 
  * Corruption, fraud, money laundering and counterfeiting of money. 

If the offence is serious enough and punishable by at least 3 years'
imprisonment in the member state that has issued the warrant, then the
arresting state must execute the European Arrest Warrant for the above listed
crimes even if the definition of the offence is not the same.

The dual criminality requirement remains for all other offences.

###  Timeframe for European Arrest Warrants

Usually, the state will decide whether or not to extradite you within 60 days
of your arrest or, if this is not possible, within 90 days. These are not
legally binding limits but are examples of the time scales involved.

###  **Who manages the European Arrest Warrant in Ireland?**

In Ireland, the Department of Justice manages the European Arrest Warrant
process as the nominated central authority.

The Director of Public Prosecutions may apply to the High Court for a European
Arrest Warrant when somebody is in another member state and faces charges or
must serve a sentence in Ireland.

##  Irish Legislation on extradition

[ Part II of the Extradition Act 1965
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1965/en/act/pub/0017/sec0008.html#zza17y1965s8)
provides for extradition between Ireland and countries other than the UK. This
legislation is modelled on the [ 1957 Council of Europe Convention on
Extradition ](http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/Treaties/Html/024.htm) to
which Ireland is a party.

Ireland is also a party to a number of international conventions which provide
special extradition arrangements in relation to specific offences - for
example, in the aviation field. The 1965 Act has been amended on a number of
occasions. In fact, Part III of the 1965 Act dealing with extradition between
Ireland and the UK was repealed by the European Arrest Warrant Act 2003.

The [ Extradition (European Union Conventions) Act 2001
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2001/en/act/pub/0049/index.html) provided for
the implementation of the [ 1995 and 1996 Conventions on Simplified
Extradition Procedure
](http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/judicial_cooperation_in_criminal_matters/l14015a_en.htm)
between the member states of the European Union. The Act also provides that
all extradition proceedings are to be heard in the High Court.

###  **Political offences and extradition**

The [ Extradition (European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism) Act
1987 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1987/en/act/pub/0001/index.html) is
based on the [ European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism
](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/090.htm) . This
legislation restricts the circumstances in which a person can avoid
extradition on the grounds that the offence in question is a political offence
or an offence connected with a political offence.

The underlying principle of the terrorism convention was that perpetrators of
acts of terrorism should not be immune from extradition, by pleading that the
act they had committed was a political offence.

The [ Extradition (Amendment) Act 1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0006/index.html) extended the
range of offences that could not be regarded as political for extradition
purposes.

_**Page edited:** 18 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/extradition-
to-and-from-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Extradition%20to%20and%20from%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/extradition-
to-and-from-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/extradition-
to-and-from-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Extradition%20to%20and%20from%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/extradition-
to-and-from-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Coming to Ireland from Ukraine_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine/)

Information for people who have come to Ireland because of the war in Ukraine.

1668.3276

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United Kingdom_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-kingdom/)

If youâ€™re an Irish citizen returning from the United Kingdom, this page can
provide you with information on topics including UK pensions, healthcare, and
housing. There is also information on this page about education and finding
work in Ireland.

1586.103

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

1521.7515

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

