**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Courts system
](/en/justice/courts-system/) > Courts

#  Courts

  * The courts system 
  * What legal matters are heard in each court? 
  * Courts Service 

##  The courts system

There are five main courts in Ireland:

  * The District Court 
  * The Circuit Court 
  * The High Court 
  * The Court of Appeal 
  * The Supreme Court 

In criminal cases:

  * The Circuit Criminal Court and the Special Criminal Court operate in place of the Circuit Court 
  * The Central Criminal Court and the Special Criminal Court operate in place of the High Court. 

Articles 34 to 37 of the [ Irish Constitution ](/en/government-in-
ireland/irish-constitution-1/constitution-introduction/) deal with the
administration of justice in general and outline the structure of the court
system.

Article 34.1 requires that justice is administered in courts established by
law. It must be administered in public (except in limit cases).

##  What legal matters are heard in each court?

Each court has the power to make judgments over legal matters depending on how
serious the matter is. This is sometimes referred to as the courtâ€™s
jurisdiction.

The [ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) is where
minor civil and criminal matters are dealt with initially. For example, if you
fail to pay a parking fine you may be brought to the District Court. You can
appeal the outcome of a case heard in the District Court to the Circuit Court.

The [ Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) is where more
serious civil and criminal matters are dealt with initially. For example, if
you are charged with a serious assault, you may be tried in the Circuit Court.
Many divorce and judicial separation proceedings are also heard in the Circuit
Court. You can appeal the outcome of a case heard in the Circuit Court to the
High Court.

The [ High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) is where the most
serious civil and criminal matters are heard initially. For example, the most
serious criminal offences, such as murder, are dealt with by the High Court.
The President of the High Court is in charge of the High Court. You can appeal
the outcome of a case heard in the High Court to the Court of Appeal or in
some instances directly to the Supreme Court.

The [ Court of Appeal ](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/) hears
appeals from the High Court in civil cases and in criminal cases hears appeals
from:

  * The Circuit Criminal Court 
  * The Central Criminal Court 
  * The Special Criminal Court 

The [ Supreme Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/) is the final
court of appeal. The Chief Justice is in charge of the Supreme Court.

###  Special Criminal Court

Other courts can hear civil and criminal matters, the [ Special Criminal Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/special-criminal-court/) only deals with criminal
cases. This court was set-up to hear cases about paramilitary, subversive and
organised crimes, but much of its workload now involves organised crime cases.
This court sits with 3 judges and no jury.

The Director of Public Prosecutions sends cases to the Special Criminal Court
when it certifies that the ordinary Courts would not be able to achieve the
effective administration of justice and the preservation of public peace and
order.

The Irish Constitution also provides for the setting up of special courts
where the best interest of justice would not be served in a normal court, for
example, the [ Children Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/children-court/) and
the [ Drug Treatment Court ](https://www.courts.ie/drug-treatment-court) .

You can find out more about [ what courts do ](https://www.courts.ie/what-
courts-do) .

##  Courts Service

The Courts Service is set up under the [ Court Service Act 1998
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1998/en/act/pub/0008/index.html) . It:

  * Manages the courts and court buildings 
  * Provides information about the operation of the courts. 

You can find more about the courts in Ireland on the [ courts service website
](https://www.courts.ie/) .

###  Courts Service

15-24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 F95Y  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://courts.ie/ ](https://courts.ie/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us
](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)

_**Page edited:** 12 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/courts/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Courts&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/courts/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/courts/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Courts&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/courts/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

644.4313

  * [ _Victims of crime and the law_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/victims-and-the-law/)

Legislation that has been implemented to protect and support victims of crime.

634.0308

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

582.59436

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

