**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Criminal insanity and mental health

#  Criminal insanity and mental health

  * Information 
  * Fit or unfit to be tried 
  * Not guilty by reason of insanity 
  * Diminished responsibility in murder cases 
  * Mental Health Review Board 

##  Information

People who are charged with a criminal offence and who are suffering from a
mental disorder are dealt with under the [ Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/11/enacted/en/html) as amended
by the [ Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2010
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2010/en/act/pub/0040/index.html) .

The question of the mental state of someone charged with a crime may arise at
2 different stages - at the start of the trial and at the decision on guilt.
If a person is suffering from a mental disorder, they may be considered unfit
to be tried at the start of the trial. In that case, no trial goes ahead. If a
trial is held and the person is considered to have actually committed the
offence but was insane at the time, it is possible for a verdict of not guilty
by reason of insanity to be reached. In murder cases, the concept of
diminished responsibility may be used to substitute a verdict of manslaughter.

A mental disorder is defined in the 2006 Act as including mental illness,
mental disability, dementia or any disease of the mind but does not include
intoxication (drunkenness).  

##  Fit or unfit to be tried

The decision on whether or not a person is fit to be tried is made by a judge.
If the person cannot understand the charge or is unable to instruct a legal
team, challenge jurors or follow the evidence, then they may be considered
unfit to be tried.

This finding (that is that someone is considered unfit to be tried) is not a
decision on the alleged criminal activity. If someone is found to be unfit to
be tried, then the trial is postponed. The judge then decides what happens
next. For example, the person may be committed to a psychiatric hospital or
unit if they are considered to be suffering from a mental disorder and are in
need of in-patient treatment under the terms of the Mental Health Act, 2001.
Alternatively, the person may be sent for out-patient psychiatric care. The
person may be committed to a psychiatric hospital or unit for 14 days in order
to establish whether or not they should be sent for treatment. The person may
appeal against a committal order.

If the judge considers that a person is unfit to be tried and that there is a
reasonable doubt that the person committed the alleged crime, the person may
be acquitted. The Director of Public Prosecutions or the accused person may
appeal against a decision that they are unfit to be tried.

##  Not guilty by reason of insanity

A person will be considered legally insane if they were suffering from a
mental disorder at the time of the offence and, as a result,

  * Did not understand what he or she was doing or 
  * Did not know what he or she was doing was wrong or 
  * Was unable to not commit the crime 

If someone is considered to have actually committed the offence but was insane
at the time, the verdict may be not guilty by reason of insanity. This
decision is made by a jury where the case is tried by a jury. Where there is
no jury, the decision is made by a judge. If this verdict is reached, the
judge may order that the person be committed to a psychiatric hospital or unit
in broadly the same way as applies in the case of being unfit to be tried.

##  Diminished responsibility in murder cases

If someone is charged with murder, the verdict of not guilty by reason of
insanity is one possible verdict. [ The Criminal Law (Insanity) Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/11/enacted/en/html) provides for
the concept of diminished responsibility in murder cases. The verdict is
available where someone does not meet the test for a verdict of not guilty by
reason of insanity but still was suffering from a mental disorder which
substantially diminished his or her responsibility for the killing.

A conviction for murder brings an automatic life sentence. In other crimes,
the judge has discretion in relation to sentencing and so can take into
account any diminished responsibility which may exist. If someone charged with
murder successfully pleads diminished responsibility, then the verdict is
manslaughter. The judge can then sentence the person to any appropriate length
of time in prison.  

##  Mental Health Review Board

The [ Mental Health (Criminal Law) Review Board's
](http://www.mhclrb.ie/index.php) main function is to review the detention of
those found not guilty by reason of insanity or unfit to be tried, who have
been detained in a designated centre by order of a court. At present, the only
designated centre is the Central Mental Hospital. The Review Board also has
responsibility for people who have been convicted of offences and who become
mentally ill while serving their sentences. The Review Board must have regard
to the welfare and safety of the person whose detention it reviews and to the
public interest. It may assign a legal representative to the person unless the
person proposes to engage one.

The Board is composed of a legally qualified chairperson and a number of other
people, at least one of whom must be a consultant psychiatrist. It is obliged
to review each detention at least once every 6 months.

_**Page edited:** 8 October 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-insanity-and-mental-
health/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Criminal%20insanity%20and%20mental%20health&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-insanity-and-mental-
health/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-insanity-and-mental-
health/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Criminal%20insanity%20and%20mental%20health&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-insanity-and-mental-
health/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001â€“2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

2559.9565

  * [ _Overview of mental health and mental illness_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-and-mental-illness/)

An overview of the mental health category including links to documents on
mental health services, community care, and the Mental Health Act 2001.

2400.419

  * [ _Inspector of Mental Health Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/inspector-of-mental-health-services/)

This document describes the Inspector of Mental Health Services who is
appointed under the Mental Health Act 2001.

1945.765

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

