**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Legal aid and
advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/) > Civil legal aid and cross border
disputes

#  Civil legal aid and cross border disputes

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you are living in Ireland and have a legal dispute in another EU country
(except Denmark) you may be able to get legal aid in the other country. Access
to legal aid in cross border disputes for residents of EU member states is
provided under [ Council Directive 2003/8/EC ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1435070967106&uri=URISERV:l33184) which established
minimum common rules relating to legal aid for such disputes. An application
form for legal aid was established by [ Commission Decision 2004/844/EC (pdf)
](http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2004:365:0027:0034:EN:PDF) ,
while [ Commission Decision 2005/630/EC (pdf) ](http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2005:225:0023:0027:EN:PDF)
established a form for the sending of applications between countries.

The appropriate authority in Ireland to apply to for legal aid if you are
involved in a cross border dispute is the [ Legal Aid Board
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) .

##  Rules

Each member state has its own financial rules and eligibility criteria. They
are modified to some extent for applicants and should take into consideration
differences in the cost of living between the country you are living in and
the country where you have the legal dispute.

The [ scope of legal aid schemes ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-
board/) and the qualifying criteria can differ between countries. As a result,
where you may get legal aid in Ireland for a particular legal dispute, you may
not qualify for legal aid in another country due to the differences in the
schemes. Similarly, you may qualify for legal aid abroad, when you would not
qualify in Ireland. In deciding whether to grant legal aid, the importance of
the case to the applicant should be taken into account.

##  How to apply

If you are living in another EU country and have a legal dispute in Ireland,
you can apply to the appropriate authority in that country or directly to the
Legal Aid Board.

If you are living in Ireland and have a legal dispute in another EU country
you can apply to the Legal Aid Board or to the appropriate authority in that
country.

If your case is in England and Wales, Scotland, or Northern Ireland, you can
contact the legal aid authority there directly for information on applying for
legal aid:

  * Legal Aid Agency (England and Wales) (0044) 845 345 4 345 
  * Scottish Legal Aid Board (0044) 131 226 7061 
  * Legal Services Agency Northern Ireland (048) 9040 8888 

You can download the application form from [ the Board's website
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Our-Services/Legal-Aid-Services/Legal-aid-in-
other-EU-member-states/) . If the application is submitted to the Legal Aid
Board, it will transmit your application for legal aid to the appropriate
authority in the other country.

You will be required to provide confirmation of your main sources of income
and expenditure, such as:

  * A copy of your latest payslip 
  * A copy of your social welfare payment slip 
  * Receipts for child care expenses 
  * Rent book/mortgage statement 

The Legal Aid Board will translate these documents before transmitting them,
if necessary.

##  Where to apply

Applications should be sent to the Legal Services Support Unit at the

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/civil-legal-aid-and-cross-border-
disputes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Civil%20legal%20aid%20and%20cross%20border%20disputes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/civil-legal-aid-and-cross-border-
disputes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/civil-legal-aid-and-cross-border-
disputes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Civil%20legal%20aid%20and%20cross%20border%20disputes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/civil-legal-aid-and-cross-border-
disputes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Civil legal aid and legal advice_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/)

An explanation of civil legal aid and legal advice and the eligibility
criteria to be able to avail of it.

3253.856

  * [ _Legal Aid Board_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/)

The Legal Aid Board provides legal aid and advice in civil cases to people in
Ireland who meet certain requirements (mainly,their means must be below a
certain limit and there must be merit in the case.

2535.5615

  * [ _Legal aid for asylum seekers_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/legal-aid-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

Legal aid is available to people who are applying for international protection
in Ireland.

2384.8276

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

