**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Arrests
](/en/justice/arrests/) > Garda interviews

#  Garda interviews

  * Introduction 
  * Your rights during a Garda interview 
  * Rules for those under 18 years of age 

##  Introduction

The [ Garda Síochána ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-
police-force/) are entitled to interview you if you have been arrested,
charged and cautioned in Ireland. You can also go to a Garda station to be
interviewed voluntarily. In this case you are free to leave at any time. There
are different rules that apply to people being interviewed who are under the
age of 18.  

##  Your rights during a Garda interview

You have a right to consult a [ solicitor ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/)
before you are interviewed.

Before you are interviewed, the Garda conducting the interview will identify
themselves, and any other Garda in the room, by name and rank.

The interview must be conducted in a fair and humane manner.

No more than two Gardaí can question you at any one time and no more than four
Gardaí can be in the room at any one time during the interview.

If an interview has lasted for four hours, it must either be ended or
adjourned for a reasonable time.

As far as possible, interviews will take place in rooms set aside for
interviews only.

You may not be questioned between midnight and 8 a.m. in relation to an
offence, unless you were brought to the station during that time, or in
exceptional circumstances.

If you are deaf or there is doubt about your hearing ability, you cannot be
questioned without an interpreter, if one is reasonably available, unless you
give your written consent. If you have requested an interpreter and one is not
reasonably available, any questions will be put to you in writing.

If you are drunk or under the influence of drugs so that you are unable to
understand the significance of questions put to you or your answers, you
cannot be questioned while you are in that condition except in exceptional
circumstances

If, while you are being interviewed, you make a complaint to a Garda in
relation to your treatment while in custody, the Garda must notify the member
in charge of the station, if they are not present at the interview, and record
it.

###  Record of the interview

A record must be kept of your interview either by the Garda conducting it or
by another Garda who is present. The record must include details of the time
the interview began and ended, any breaks in it, the place of the interview
and the names and ranks of the Gardaí present. If the interview is not
electronically recorded, the record will be kept in the Garda's notebook.

###  Your solicitor’s role

If your [ solicitor ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) is present at your
interview, they will sit with you and they may intervene during questioning.
This may be to:

  * Seek clarification 
  * Challenge an improper question 
  * Advise you not to answer a question 
  * Request the interview be suspended so they can advise you 

They cannot stop you from answering questions or tell you what to say. You can
choose not to answer questions and instead provide a prepared statement.

##  Rules for those under 18 years of age

If you are under 18 years of age, you cannot be questioned unless a parent or
guardian is present, except in exceptional circumstances. You have a right to
consult a solicitor before you are interviewed.

If it is not possible to get the parent or guardian you requested to come to
the interview, the member in charge of the station must try to arrange for
your other parent, another guardian, an adult relative or some other
responsible adult other than a Garda to attend.

The member in charge may exclude your parent or guardian from the interview
if:

  * Your parent or guardian is the victim of the offence being investigated 
  * Your parent or guardian has been arrested in relation to the offence or is a suspect 
  * The member in charge has reasonable grounds for believing that your parent or guardian would obstruct the course of justice if they were at the interview. 

_**Page edited:** 14 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/garda-
interviews/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Garda%20interviews&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/garda-
interviews/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/garda-
interviews/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Garda%20interviews&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/garda-
interviews/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Garda Síochána - national police force_ ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/)

The Garda Síochána is the national police force. It has responsibility for
carrying out all policing duties in the State.

1339.0146

  * [ _Questioning and surveillance by Gardaí_ ](/en/justice/arrests/questioning-and-surveillance/)

The Gardaí have the right to request information from the public, make general
enquiries and more. What is the role of the Gardaí in questioning and
surveillance of the public?

1131.5063

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

904.9118

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

