**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Prison system
](/en/justice/prison-system/) > Irish prisoners overseas

#  Irish prisoners overseas

  * Introduction 
  * Returning prisoners to Ireland 
  * Supports 
  * Contacts 

##  Introduction

Irish prisoners overseas can face significant difficulties, including language
barriers, discrimination and an unfamiliar legal system. In some countries,
prison conditions are also a cause of hardship.

The families of prisoners overseas may encounter problems such as language and
cultural differences, or difficulty communicating with their loved one.

This document discusses some of the issues facing Irish prisoners overseas and
their families. It includes information on:

  * Repatriation 
  * Deportation; and 
  * Support services 

##  Returning prisoners to Ireland

###  Repatriation

Ireland is a signatory to the [ Council of Europe Convention on the Transfer
of Sentenced Persons
](http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/112.htm) . This is a
legal agreement that allows prisoners to apply to be transferred home to serve
their prison sentence in their own country.

For a transfer to take place, there must be agreement among:

  * The prisoner 
  * The sentencing country; and 
  * The prisoner’s home country 

The following 4 conditions must also be met for a prisoner to be eligible to
apply for a transfer:

  1. The prisoner must be regarded as a national of the country they wish to be transferred to. 
  2. The sentence must be final. A prisoner cannot apply for transfer before they face trial or until after all appeals have been heard. 
  3. There must be at least 6 months left to serve on the sentence. 
  4. The crime that the prisoner is convicted of must also be a crime in their home country. 

An application for a transfer usually begins with the prisoner informing the
prison authorities that they wish to be transferred back to Ireland to serve
their sentence.

Alternatively, the prisoner [ can communicate this wish directly to the
Minister for Justice ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-
justice/) . However, it is likely that this will add a number of weeks to the
process.

###  Deportation

Upon completion of their sentence, an Irish national may automatically be
returned to Ireland by the authorities of the country in which they were
imprisoned. This is referred to as deportation.

Some countries automatically deport an overseas prisoner if they have served a
certain amount of time in prison or if they have any previous convictions.

If deported, it is important that a prisoner keeps whatever documentation they
are given about their imprisonment and subsequent deportation. This material
may be helpful in obtaining benefits in Ireland.

Irish prisoners are, with limited exceptions, [ exempt from compulsory
deportation ](https://www.icpo.ie/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Deportation-
Factsheet-August-2019_FINAL.pdf) from the United Kingdom upon completion of
their sentence.

###  Entitlement to social welfare

To be entitled to certain social welfare payments, a returning ex-prisoner
must satisfy the [ habitual residence condition ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-residence-
condition/) . This means that they must have a close link to Ireland.

However, people who have been deported generally do not have to satisfy the
habitual residence condition.

##  Supports

###  Irish Council for Prisoners Overseas

The [ Irish Council for Prisoners Overseas (ICPO) ](http://www.icpo.ie/) is a
charitable organisation that works to provide information and support to Irish
people imprisoned overseas and their families.

ICPO services include:

  * Providing information and support to prisoners and their families on a wide range of issues, including repatriation, deportation, health, legal matters, discrimination and ill-treatment 
  * Representing prisoners’ interests to relevant parties (Irish embassies and consulates, welfare agencies, probation and legal officers) 
  * Monitoring repatriation applications with the Department of Justice 
  * Providing help to prisoners in preparation for their release 
  * Visiting prisoners and helping families with travel and accommodation for prison visits 

The ICPO holds a Family Information Day each year to provide families with
information and support and to give them the opportunity to meet other people
who have a relative in prison overseas.

You can find more information in a leaflet about the [ ICPO (pdf)
](https://www.icpo.ie/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/ICPO-General-Information-
Leaflet.pdf) .

###  Consular Assistance

[ Irish embassies and consulates ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/)
ensure that the rights of Irish citizens who are arrested or imprisoned abroad
are fully respected. In many cases the local authorities will only contact the
Irish embassy or consulate if requested to do so. Among other things, a
consular officer can:

  * Help with getting information about prison arrangements 
  * Provide information about local lawyers 
  * Provide families with information about the prison and legal arrangements in the country where their family member is detained 
  * Help prisoners to maintain contact with friends and family and arrange for the safe transfer of funds they provide 
  * Put the detained person in touch with relevant agencies such as ICPO 

You can get [ more information on consular assistance
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/assistance-abroad/arrest-
detention/) on the Department of Foreign Affairs website.

##  Contacts

###  ICPO

Columba Centre  
Maynooth  
Co. Kildare  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 505 3156

**Fax:** (01) 629 2363

**Homepage:** [ http://www.icpo.ie ](http://www.icpo.ie)

**Email:** [ icpo@iecon.ie ](mailto:icpo@iecon.ie)

###  ICPO (London)

50-52 Camden Square  
London  
NW1 9XB  
United Kingdom

**Tel:** +44 207 482 5528

**Fax:** +44 207 482 4815

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irishchaplaincy.org.uk/
](http://www.irishchaplaincy.org.uk/)

**Email:** [ prisoners@irishchaplaincy.org.uk
](mailto:prisoners@irishchaplaincy.org.uk)

###  Department of Justice

94 St. Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 602 8202

**Locall:** 1800 221 227

**Fax:** (01) 661 5461

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/)

**Email:** [ info@justice.ie ](mailto:info@justice.ie)

###  Department of Foreign Affairs

Consular Assistance

**Tel:** +353 1 408 2000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/consular-
services/ ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/consular-services/)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.dfa.ie/about-us/contact-us/contact-consular-
assistance/ ](https://www.dfa.ie/about-us/contact-us/contact-consular-
assistance/)

_**Page edited:** 11 February 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/irish-prisoners-overseas/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Irish%20prisoners%20overseas&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/irish-prisoners-overseas/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/irish-prisoners-overseas/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Irish%20prisoners%20overseas&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/irish-prisoners-overseas/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Prisoners' rights_ ](/en/justice/prison-system/prisoners-rights/)

The main source of prisoners' rights is the Prison Rules 2007. Find out more.

1261.0115

  * [ _PPS numbers for returning Irish emigrants and their families_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-and-families/)

Find your existing PPS number or apply for a new PPS number when returning
home to Ireland. You can also apply for a PPS number for a child born abroad.

956.5784

  * [ _Irish Constitution and education_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/constitution-and-education/)

The Irish Constitution (Bunreacht na hÉireann) contains specific articles on
education, religion, and the family, which affect how education is organised.

911.1997

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

