**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Commissioners for Oaths

#  Commissioners for Oaths

  * Introduction 
  * When would you need a Commissioner for Oaths? 
  * Process 
  * Rates 
  * How to become a Commissioner for Oaths 

##  Introduction

A Commissioner for Oaths is a person who is authorised to witness the signing
of important legal documents, including [ affidavits
](/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/) and statutory declarations. They are
appointed by the Chief Justice and are usually, though not always, a
solicitor. All practicing solicitors can also administer oaths. Unlike a [
Peace Commissioner ](/en/justice/civil-law/peace-commissioners/) , a
Commissioner for Oaths charges a fee for their services.

##  When would you need a Commissioner for Oaths?

You may need a Commissioner for Oaths if you are:

  * Giving evidence on affidavit for court proceedings in Ireland 
  * Making an affirmation, declaration, acknowledgement, examination or attestation for a variety of reasons, including court proceedings or for the registration of documents 

If you need a Commissioner for Oaths, you should contact a solicitor and ask
whether they provide this service to the public. You may need to provide the
Commissioner with evidence of your identity, such as a passport or driving
licence.

##  Process

When you go to a Commissioner for Oaths they will:

  * Make sure you have a document that is written down 
  * Check your identification 
  * Establish that you have read the affidavit or document and understand what it says 
  * Have you swear that the affidavit is true 
  * Verify that the affidavit was properly sworn by completing a "jurat" which records your name, the place and the date. 

In order to swear you will use a sacred text. The Commissioner for Oaths will
have a variety of sacred texts available. If you are not religious then you
may make an affirmation rather than an oath.

##  Rates

The fees a Commissioner for Oaths can charge are given in the [ Rules of the
Superior Courts (Fees Payable to Commissioners for Oaths) (SI 616 of 2003)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2003/en/si/0616.html) . They are:

  * €10 euro per signature for verifying statements 
  * €2 charge for each exhibit that is attached to the document, up to a maximum of €30. 

You are advised to check the charges in advance as they may vary. If the
Commissioner for Oaths has to travel to you there will probably be an extra
fee, for example.

A Commissioner for Oaths, who is also a Peace Commissioner, must not charge
fees for administering oaths or taking declarations or affirmations that they
cannot charge for as a [ Peace Commissioner ](/en/justice/civil-law/peace-
commissioners/) .

##  How to become a Commissioner for Oaths

Commissioners for Oaths are appointed by the Chief Justice. Applications are
made by petition. This is accompanied by a certificate of fitness generally
signed by six members of the legal profession and six leaders of the local
business community. There are a [ number of fees(pdf)
](https://www.courts.ie/view/document/46b91a0a-547e-42ce-
ac15-79d505ac70f8/Requirements for applying to become a commissioner for
oaths.pdf/pdf) required to make an application.

If you are a Commissioner for Oaths and you are a:

  * Solicitor – you cannot use your powers in any proceedings in which you are acting for any of the parties or in which you have an interest. 
  * Non-solicitor – you must not practise outside the area for which you are appointed. 

_**Page edited:** 1 February 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Commissioners%20for%20Oaths&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Commissioners%20for%20Oaths&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Functions and duties of individuals in a court of law_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/functions-and-duties-of-individuals-in-a-court-of-law/)

This document provides an introduction to the section outlining the different
functions and duties of individuals in a court of law.

1198.7858

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1123.1055

  * [ _Rights and duties of asylum seekers in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/rights-and-obligations-of-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

People applying for international protection in Ireland have certain legal
rights. They also have important duties. Find out about these rights and
obligations.

1063.543

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

