**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Legal fees and costs for civil cases

#  Legal fees and costs for civil cases

  * Information 
  * Rules 
  * Further information 

##  Information

If you are taking a civil case to court in Ireland, as soon as possible after
you have given instructions to your [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) , he/she must advise you in writing of
the fees you would be charged for his/her services. If it is not possible to
give you a definite sum, he/she must estimate a sum or at the very least
describe the basis upon which charges or fees will be calculated. A solicitor
must generally wait until you confirm that you accept the charges provided
before providing legal services.

If it is proposed that a [ barrister ](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) be
engaged, you must be provided with an estimate of his or her cost by the
solicitor. If the barrister is then engaged, he or she must provide a
similarly detailed estimate in writing of his/her charges to the solicitor,
which is then passed to you.

When it becomes clear that the legal costs are likely to be significantly
greater than those initially set out, an updated notice in writing must be
provided to you. A lawyer must provide clarification in relation to any item
included in any notice as soon as reasonably practicable after you have asked
for it.

Usually lawyers will wait until a case is concluded before requiring payment
of their fees. However, sometimes fees will be requested in advance,
especially in a case where you run a high risk of losing.

##  Rules

The fee can consist of the professional fee, miscellaneous charges (for
example, phone calls) and charges from third parties, (for example, government
agencies).

Lawyer's charges are based on the following:

  * the complexity and novelty of the matter 
  * the skill or specialised knowledge needed to deal with the matter 
  * the time spent on the matter 
  * the urgency of the matter and whether priority was given to the matter over other matters 
  * circumstances in which the matter was dealt 
  * the number, importance and complexity of the documents prepared or examined 
  * the amount or value of any transaction involved 
  * whether there is any limitation on a lawyer’s liability 
  * the time reasonably spent researching the matter 
  * the reasonable costs of any expert witnesses used 

At the conclusion of the case, the solicitor and any barrister should give you
a detailed statement of all the legal costs associated with your case (“Bill
of Costs”). The Bill of Costs you receive, must contain certain things:

  * Summary of the legal services you were provided with 
  * Details of all the charges that were incurred and the nature of these charges 
  * The amount of VAT charged 
  * Where costs are calculated based on time, the amount of time spent on a matter 
  * The financial outcome of the case, i.e. any damages or other money recovered or payable to the client 
  * Whether any costs have been paid or are payable by another party 

The Bill of Costs must be accompanied by an explanation in writing of how any
aspect Bill of Costs can be challenged by a client.

Lawyers are generally not allowed to charge you on the basis of a percentage
of any award or settlement of your case.

If you are unhappy with your solicitor's or barrister’s bill you have a number
of options, see 'Further Information' below.

Usually if you win your case, most or all of your costs (including legal fees)
will be paid for by the other party.

However, you may be obliged to pay all the costs and fees of your own legal
team and that of the other party in the following situations:

  * if you lose your case 
  * agree to accept an amount less than your full claim 
  * a court fails to award you your costs or a proportion of them 
  * the court awards costs against you 

It is important to note that InjuriesBoard.ie doesn't award costs for or
against either party.

##  Further information

A lawyer's fee must not be excessive for the work done. If you think your
lawyer's bill is excessive you should contact your solicitor to seek
clarification and try to come to an agreement.

You could also have your legal costs independently and impartially assessed by
the [ Office of Legal Costs Adjudicators ](/en/justice/courts-system/office-
of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/) . This process is now known as the
adjudication of costs. It was previously known as the taxation of costs and
was carried out by Taxing Masters. The Courts Service has [ information on the
process ](https://www.courts.ie/general-information-legal-costs-adjudication)
on its website.

If you are still not happy you can make a complaint about excessive costs to
the [ Legal Services Regulatory Authority ](/en/justice/courts-system/legal-
services-regulatory-authority/) . The Legal Services Regulatory Authority is
independent in the performance of its functions. Read more about [ making a
complaint here ](https://www.lsra.ie/make-a-complaint/how-to-make-a-
complaint/) .

_**Page edited:** 19 August 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/legal-fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Legal%20fees%20and%20costs%20for%20civil%20cases&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/legal-fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/legal-fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Legal%20fees%20and%20costs%20for%20civil%20cases&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/legal-fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Proceedings in civil court cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/proceedings-in-civil-court-cases/)

Civil court cases follow a standard format. Information on proceedings, how
witnesses are called and liability.

1685.1794

  * [ _Civil legal aid and legal advice_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/)

An explanation of civil legal aid and legal advice and the eligibility
criteria to be able to avail of it.

1643.619

  * [ _Civil legal aid and cross border disputes_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-aid-and-cross-border-disputes/)

If you have a legal dispute in another EU country you may be able to avail of
legal aid in that country by applying to the Legal Aid Board.

1460.2948

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

