**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > High Court procedures

#  High Court procedures

  * Introduction 
  * Originating summons 
  * Entering an appearance 
  * Statement of claim 
  * Delivering the defence 
  * Delivering a reply 
  * Particulars 
  * Setting down for trial 
  * Rates 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

In the [ High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) , the person who
is bringing the case, that is, the person who is suing, is known as the
_plaintiff_ . The person who is being sued is known as the _defendant_ .

To commence proceedings, that is, to start a legal action, the plaintiff's [
barrister ](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) generally prepares an
_originating summons_ . The purpose of this document is to state the case
being made against the defendant.

When the defendant receives the summons, they must _enter an appearance_ to
show that they are now a party to the case.

Depending on the type of originating summons, the plaintiff may have to serve
a _statement of claim_ on the defendant. When the defendant has received the
statement of claim, they will issue a _defence_ , setting out why the
defendant is not to blame.

If the defendant believes that they actually have a claim against the
plaintiff, the defendant will include a _counterclaim_ with the defence
setting out their claim against the plaintiff.

##  Originating summons

Usually proceedings in the High Court are commenced by an originating summons.

After the summons has been prepared by your barrister, your [ solicitor
](/en/justice/civil-law/representation-in-court/) takes it to the [ Central
Office ](https://www.courts.ie/content/central-office-high-court) to be
_issued_ \- this involves paying the stamp duty. After the stamp duty has been
paid, the summons is stamped and it is ready to be served on the defendant.
There is more information on service below.

###  Types of originating summons

There are 4 types of originating summons:

####  1\. Plenary summons

A [ plenary summons ](https://www.courts.ie/content/originating-summons-
appearance#_ftn1) is used to commence proceedings where there is a real
dispute between the parties and/or the amount of the plaintiff's claim is not
specific or easy to calculate.

For example, a plenary summons may be used where the plaintiff claims that
their property was damaged due to the defendant's negligence.

When a plenary summons is issued, the next step is for the parties to exchange
pleadings (see statement of claim and delivering the defence below).
Eventually, the case will be given a date for a trial and there may be
evidence given by witnesses.

####  2\. Summary summons

A [ summary summons ](https://www.courts.ie/content/originating-summons-
appearance#_mon4) is used when the amount of the plaintiff's claim is easily
quantifiable and the defendant does not have any valid defence.

For example, a summary summons may be used where the plaintiff claims that
they lent the defendant a specific amount of money that has not been repaid.
It is a fast-track procedure where the judge decides the case after reading [
affidavits ](/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/) submitted by both sides.

However, if it becomes clear to the judge that the defendant has a stateable
defence to the claim, the judge may order that the case be dealt with as
_plenary proceedings_ . This means that pleadings will be exchanged and the
matter may go to trial.

####  3\. Special summons

A [ special summons ](https://www.courts.ie/content/originating-summons-
appearance#_ftn3) is used for cases that involve pure issues of law or very
specific issues of fact.

For example, a special summons will be issued to commence a claim relating to
the [ administration of the estate of a deceased person ](/en/death/the-
deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) . Like summary
proceedings, this is a fast-track procedure where the judge decides the case
by reading affidavits submitted by both sides.

####  4\. Personal injuries summons

A [ personal injuries summons ](https://courts.ie/content/personal-injuries-
actions-civil-liability-and-courts-act-2004#_fri1) is used for cases where the
plaintiff claims that they have been injured due to acts or omissions of a
defendant.

Before issuing a personal injuries summons, you must first apply to the [
Injuries Assessment Board ](/en/justice/civil-law/injuries-resolution-board/)
. You should also issue a letter of claim to the defendant within 2 months of
becoming aware of the injuries.

There is [ more information on originating summons
](https://courts.ie/issuing-proceedings) on the Courts Service website.

###  Content of an originating summons

All originating summonses must contain the following information:

  * A title – the plaintiff's name and the defendant's name make up the title of the proceedings. 
  * The type of the summons, for example, plenary summons. 
  * A description of the parties – the summons must state the surname, first name, the residence or place of business and the occupation of the plaintiff. It must also state the name and address of the defendant (or their solicitor, if known). 
  * An [ indorsement of claim ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/indorsement-claim) – this is the part of the summons that sets out what the plaintiff claims they are entitled to. The level of detail necessary in this section depends on the type of summons. If the summons is a plenary summons, it is only necessary to give the defendant information about the general nature of the plaintiff's claim – more detail will be provided in the statement of claim that follows. If the summons is a summary summons or a special summons, much more detail must be given about the nature, extent and grounds of the plaintiff's claim against the defendant. It should clearly set out the allegations that are being made by the plaintiff and the amount that the plaintiff claims they are entitled to. 

###  Serving an originating summons

To serve an originating summons, a copy of the summons can be handed to the
defendant and they must be shown the original. The summons can be served on
the defendant's solicitor if they accept service on behalf of their client and
is authorised to do so. It is also possible to serve a summons by sending it
via registered post to the defendant’s last known residence or place of
business. There is more information on serving a summons in [ Order 9 of the
Rules of the Superior Courts. ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/service-summons)

##  Entering an appearance

When a defendant receives a plenary or a summary summons they should enter an
appearance within 8 days. This time limit is not strict and, in most cases, an
appearance can be entered after the time has expired.

When a defendant receives a special summons they may enter an appearance at
any time. They will not be heard at any proceedings unless they have entered
an appearance.

Entering an appearance is a very important step as it indicates that the
defendant intends to defend the proceedings.

If the defendant fails to enter an appearance, the plaintiff can apply to
court for [ judgment in default of appearance
](https://courts.ie/rules/default-appearance) . This means that because the
defendant has failed to acknowledge the proceedings and indicate that they
intend to defend them, the plaintiff may obtain a judgment from the court
against the defendant without the need for a trial.

To enter an appearance, the defendant must lodge a [ memorandum of appearance
](https://courts.ie/content/originating-summons-appearance#_mon9) at the
Central Office. The plaintiff's solicitor must then be notified by the
defendant that an appearance has been entered.

###  Memorandum of appearance

The short form must contain the following information:

  * The date 
  * The name of the defendant's solicitor. If the defendant does not have a solicitor, it must state that the defendant defends in person. 
  * The form must also give the solicitor's address. If the defendant does not have a solicitor, it must state an address where documents can be left for them. 

Further information on entering an appearance is available in [ Order 12 of
the Rules of the Superior Courts ](https://courts.ie/rules/appearance) .

##  Statement of claim

If the case has been commenced by a plenary summons and the defendant has
entered an appearance, then the next step is for the plaintiff to serve a [
statement of claim ](https://www.courts.ie/content/indorsements-
pleadings#weds5) on the defendant.

The plaintiff has an initial period of 8 weeks to deliver the statement of
claim after the defendant has entered an appearance. If the plaintiff fails to
deliver the statement of claim within the required time, the defendant can
apply to the court to dismiss the action for want of prosecution. The
defendant generally must give the plaintiff 28 days’ notice that they intend
to make such an application before they actually do so. Further information on
such applications can be found in Order 27 of the Rules of the Superior
Courts.

It is not necessary to serve the statement of claim personally on the
defendant – it may be sent by registered post.

The purpose of the statement of claim is to show the defendant the case that
is being made against them and which they have to meet at the trial of the
action.

###  Content of statement of claim

The statement of claim must contain the following information:

  * The title and record number – the plaintiff's name and the defendant's name make up the title of the proceedings. 
  * A description of the parties – the statement of claim must state the surname, first name, the residence or place of business and the occupation of the plaintiff and the defendant. 
  * The statement of claim must state the nature, extent and grounds of the plaintiff's claim against the defendant. It should clearly set out the allegations that are being made by the plaintiff and the damage that the plaintiff suffered. It should also state what the plaintiff is seeking from the court. 
  * The statement of claim must be dated and signed by the plaintiff or their solicitor. 

Further information is available in Order 20 of the Rules of the Superior
Courts.

##  Delivering the defence

The defendant must deliver a [ defence
](https://www.courts.ie/content/indorsements-pleadings#weds6) to the plaintiff
and they must generally deliver the defence within 8 weeks of receiving the
statement of claim.

If the defendant fails to deliver the defence within the required time, the
defendant can apply to the court to judgment in default of defence. This means
judgment can be given without the need for a full trial. The plaintiff
generally must give the defendant 28 days’ notice that they intend to make
such an application before they actually do so. Further information on such
applications can be found in Order 27 of the Rules of the Superior Courts.

When they receive the statement of claim, the defendant may decide that not
only have they done nothing wrong and the claim should not have been brought
against them, but that they have a claim against the plaintiff. In those
circumstances, they may wish to include a _counterclaim_ with their defence.

###  The defence contents

The document starts with the title of the proceedings and the record number.

It is up to the defendant to admit or deny the allegations that the plaintiff
has made in their statement of claim. It is also up to the defendant to state
any specific defence that they are relying on. For example, if the defendant
is claiming that the plaintiff's claim has been brought outside of the
permitted [ time limits ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-
case/) , then the defendant should specifically plead that fact in the
defence.

If the plaintiff has made a specific allegation and the defendant fails to
deny that allegation in the defence, it will be assumed that the defendant is
admitting that the allegation is true. For example, if the plaintiff has
claimed in the statement of claim that they were involved in a road traffic
accident and the defence fails to deny that the road traffic accident
occurred, then it is assumed that the defendant is admitting that the road
traffic accident happened. It is not then necessary for the plaintiff to prove
to the judge that the accident occurred.

On the other hand, when the defendant specifically denies a claim that the
plaintiff has made, they are putting the plaintiff _on proof_ of the
allegation. This means that the plaintiff must prove that the claim is true.
For example, if the defence specifically denies that the road traffic accident
occurred, the plaintiff must prove it by introducing evidence in court.

###  Counterclaim

If the defendant wishes to make a claim against the plaintiff, this can be
done by adding a counterclaim section to the defence. This must clearly set
out the allegations that the defendant is making against the plaintiff and
what the defendant seeks from the court.

There is more information in Order 21 of the Rules of the Superior Courts.

##  Delivering a reply

It is often necessary to reply to points raised in a defence. If the plaintiff
wishes to deliver a [ reply ](https://courts.ie/content/indorsements-
pleadings#weds6) , they must do so within 14 days of receiving the defence
unless the time is extended by the Court.

Where a counterclaim has been delivered by the defence, the reply is subject
to the rules that apply to a defence.

Further information is available in [ Order 23 of the Rules of the Superior
Courts ](https://courts.ie/rules/reply-and-subsequent-pleadings) .

##  Particulars

Where either plaintiff or defendant is unsure of the case they have to meet,
they can seek _particulars_ . It is a request for more information about the
case. They can also seek _further and better particulars_ about any matter
stated in any pleading.

They can apply for the particulars by letter or, if that fails, seek an order
from the Court.

Further information is available in Rules 7 and 8 of [ Order 19 of the Rules
of the Superior Courts ](https://courts.ie/rules/pleading-generally) .

##  Setting down for trial

In general, in actions commenced by plenary or personal injuries summons a [
notice of trial ](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c) (Form [
18 ](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c##Form18) , [ 18A
](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c##Form18A) or [ 19
](https://www.courts.ie/content/notices-affidavits-c##Form19) ) is served by
the plaintiff on the defendant and is set down for trial in the Central
Office. At least 21 days’ notice must be given, unless shorter notice has been
agreed. A motion to set aside the notice of trial must be brought within 4
days of the service of the notice.

If the plaintiff does not give notice of trial within 6 weeks after the close
of the pleadings, or within such extended time as the Court may allow, the
defendant may give notice of trial or may apply to the Court to dismiss the
action for want of prosecution.

Notice of trial is given before setting down the action for trial. If the
action is not set down by either party within 14 days of notice of trial being
served, the notice of trial will no longer be in force.

The party setting down the proceedings for trial does so by delivering to the
Central Office a copy of the notice of trial together with 2 copies of the
whole of the pleadings (and of any letter or notice for particulars and reply
to it), one of which is for the use of the judge at the trial. It may also be
necessary to file a certificate of readiness.

Further information is available in [ Order 36 of the Rules of the Superior
Courts ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/trial) .

When the case is set down for trial, it is assigned to the relevant listing
for the type of case. Information on listing procedures is available [ on the
Courts Service website ](https://www.courts.ie/procedure-high-court) .

##  Rates

The stamp duty that must be paid when a summons is issued is generally €190.
The stamp duty for entering an appearance is €60.

There is no fee or stamp duty for lodging a defence.

Further information on [ High Court fees ](https://www.courts.ie/superior-
court-fees) is available on the Courts Service website.

Your solicitor and barrister will also charge fees for their services.

##  Further information

Further information on [ High Court procedures
](https://www.courts.ie/procedure-high-court) , [ High Court rules
](https://www.courts.ie/superior-court-rules) and [ forms
](https://www.courts.ie/superior-court-forms) is available on the Courts
Service website.

_**Page edited:** 28 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/high-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=High%20Court%20procedures&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/high-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/high-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=High%20Court%20procedures&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/high-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _High Court_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/)

The High Court has jurisdiction in criminal and civil cases. Find out where,
and how matters are heard in this court.

1812.1985

  * [ _Circuit Court procedures_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/circuit-court-procedures/)

A Civil Bill is a document that you must serve on the defendant in order to
commence proceedings in the Circuit Court. Find out more

1324.99

  * [ _Proceedings in civil court cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/proceedings-in-civil-court-cases/)

Civil court cases follow a standard format. Information on proceedings, how
witnesses are called and liability.

1299.7709

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

