**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Court poor box

#  Court poor box

  * What is the court poor box? 
  * Legal status 
  * Purpose of the court poor box 
  * How the court poor box works 
  * Further information 

##  What is the court poor box?

In criminal prosecutions heard in lower courts (usually the [ District Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/)
), the [ judge
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) may order
the defendant to place a donation in the court poor box in lieu of conviction.

This means that instead of being convicted and facing a prison sentence or a
statutory fine, the defendant donates a sum of money to a charity decided by
the judge.

The sum can vary in amount, depending on the offence. This donation is then
lodged by the defendant with the court and paid over by the [ Court Service
](https://www.courts.ie/content/general-information) to the charity.

##  Legal status

There is no legislation guiding the use of court poor boxes. The current
system has evolved over the years from the judge's common law jurisdiction to
exercise their discretion in imposing penalties.

Where an accused makes a payment to the poor box, the judge usually applies
the Probation of Offenders Act 1907 or imposes a suspended sentence.

####  **Proposal to abolish the court poor box**

In 2005, the [ Law Reform Commission ](http://www.lawreform.ie/) published
their [ Report on the court poor box: probation of offenders (pdf)
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/Reports/rCourtPoorBox.pdf) . This report
makes recommendations for reforming the court poor box and the Probation of
Offenders Act 1907.

In February 2014, the Department of Justice published the [ General Scheme of
Criminal Justice (Community Sanctions) Bill
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/1b57f-criminal-justice-community-
sanctions-bill/) . This Bill proposes to abolish the court poor box and
replace it with a statutory Reparation Fund that will apply to minor offences
dealt with by the District Court.

##  Purpose of the court poor box

The most common reason for using the court poor box is that, in the opinion of
the judge, while the prosecution has proven its case, it is not appropriate to
enter a conviction. For example, because it is a minor or first offence.

Having a conviction registered against you can significantly affect your life
by damaging employment prospects, careers and social relationships. For this
reason, where the court feels that the citizen will not re-offend, the judge
can choose to impose a donation to the court poor box.

###  Objections to the court poor box

The Law Reform Commission published a [ report on the court poor box (pdf)
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/Reports/rCourtPoorBox.pdf) in 2005 and
found that the system is unfair for offenders from different economic
backgrounds.

Offenders who can afford to pay the fine can avoid conviction, while people
who cannot afford to pay the fine have no choice but to have the conviction
registered against them. The court poor box is also not universally used, so
some offenders may not have the option available to them depending on where
they are tried.

There are also concerns as to the lack of accountability regarding the use of
funds, as well as concerns that donations to the court poor box deprive the
Irish Government of the fines that would normally be imposed. It has been
suggested that a new system where the money collected went to victims of crime
would be more appropriate.

##  How the court poor box works

There is no set procedure for how the court will handle the process.

Generally, if a judge orders that you make a donation to the court poor box
and you have the funds to pay, the [ Court Registrar
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/functions-and-
duties-of-individuals-in-a-court-of-law/#97df8e) will collect the payment and
issue you with a receipt.

If you do not have the funds with you but you can afford to pay, then
arrangements will be made for you to pay at a later date.

Donations are forwarded to the relevant charity or organisation by the court.

If you do not have the funds to pay or choose not to make a donation, a
conviction for your offence will be registered against you.

##  Further information

Further information about the court poor box in your area is available from
your local court. You can find contact information for courts throughout
Ireland [ on the Courts Service website
](http://www.courts.ie/offices.nsf/webcobycounty) .

The Court Service also publishes annual reports that show [ which charities
benefited from poor box donations ](https://www.courts.ie/policy-reports-
strategic-plans#Poorbox) .

_**Page edited:** 17 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Court%20poor%20box&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Court%20poor%20box&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Functions and duties of individuals in a court of law_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/functions-and-duties-of-individuals-in-a-court-of-law/)

This document provides an introduction to the section outlining the different
functions and duties of individuals in a court of law.

1210.6333

  * [ _How to make an observation on a strategic infrastructure development with An Bord Pleanála_ ](/en/housing/planning-permission/how-to-make-an-observation-on-a-strategic-infrastructure-development-with-an-bord-plean%C3%A1la/)

It is possible for anyone to see and make an observation on applications for
planning permission for major infrastructure developments with An Bord
Pleanála. Find out how to make an observation.

1175.0615

  * [ _Courts_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/courts/)

An outline of the courts and the offices that support them.

1071.3201

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

