**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Negligence and compensation in a civil case

#  Negligence and compensation in a civil case

  * Introduction 
  * Negligence in the context of an accident 
  * Further Information 

##  Introduction

Where a person has acted negligently and their negligence has caused you loss,
you may be entitled to compensation from that person. This can arise in a
number of contexts.

For instance, you could be injured in a car accident due to another road
user’s negligence. You may sustain injuries during an assault or during a
poorly carried out medical procedure. Your house or apartment could be poorly
constructed and you may be entitled to sue those responsible for its
construction. You may receive advice which is fundamentally incorrect and,
after acting upon it, find out that you are financially worse off.

For an act or omission of a wrongdoer to be negligent in the legal sense:

  * The wrongdoer must owe you a duty of care 
  * The wrongdoer must have failed to meet that duty of care in their actions 
  * The act or omission must have been the cause of your loss 

A duty of care arises where it is reasonably foreseeable that if a person acts
negligently, they will hurt you and there is some relationship between them
and you.

For example, a driver has a duty of care to other road users. A business has a
duty of care to its customers. A doctor has a duty of care to their patients.

In deciding whether a wrongdoer has failed to meet their duty of care, their
actions are judged against an objective standard.

In other words, did the driver exercise the normal amount of caution in the
circumstances? Did the business comply with all its obligations? Did the
doctor act to the standard of a comparable colleague?

If you are entitled to compensation, it will normally be composed of 2
elements:

  1. General damages for the non-financial losses, such as pain and suffering 
  2. Special damages for the financial losses, such as loss of income and extra expenses 

##  Negligence in the context of an accident

It is not enough to have been in an accident or to have suffered injury in
order to obtain compensation from the courts. It must be clear that the party
or parties you have sued were to blame for the accident and the injuries that
you have suffered.

It may be the case that a number of people are partly to blame for an
accident, including the person suing. In that situation, the court will
apportion or divide the blame between the different people involved.

For example, a driver who suffered injury in a car accident in circumstances
where they were not wearing a seat-belt may be 15% to blame for the injuries
they suffered. As a result, the court may only award then 85% of the
compensation that their injuries are valued at.

Your claim for compensation will be divided into two parts.

**General damages**

This is compensation for the pain, suffering and inconvenience you experienced
and will continue to experience as a result of the accident.

The court will decide the level of damages by estimating the gravity of the
injuries. It will do this by considering all the medical evidence put before
it, notably the pain already suffered by the person suing and the prognosis
for the future – that is, how long and to what intensity the injured party is
likely to continue suffering.

**Special damages**

This is compensation for the financial costs and expenses, both past and
future, you incurred as a result of the accident. This would include the cost
of repairing your car (if relevant), the medical costs you incurred, your loss
of earnings as a result of being unable to go to work and all expenses,
including travel, home-help and similar, you incurred.

You may be asked to produce receipts and bills to prove you have incurred all
of these expenses so it is important to keep a file of every bill and receipt.

##  Further Information

If you are involved in litigation or legal proceedings, you will probably need
[ legal representation. ](/en/justice/civil-law/representation-in-court/) You
can learn more about accessing [ civil legal aid and advice
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) in
Ireland.

To enquire whether you are eligible for legal aid or advice [ from the Legal
Aid Board ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) , contact [
your nearest law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/Publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) . You
can also contact your [ nearest Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on [ FLAC (Free
Legal Advice Centres) services ](http://www.flac.ie/) in your area.

_**Page edited:** 12 June 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/negligence-and-compensation/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Negligence%20and%20compensation%20in%20a%20civil%20case&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/negligence-and-compensation/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/negligence-and-compensation/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Negligence%20and%20compensation%20in%20a%20civil%20case&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/negligence-and-compensation/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Compensation for overbooked, cancelled and delayed flights in the EU_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/compensation-for-overbooked-and-delayed-flights/)

Air passengers have specific consumer rights. Find out what happens if you are
denied access to an overbooked scheduled flight or your flight is cancelled or
delayed.

1483.1577

  * [ _Legal fees and costs for civil cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/legal-fees-and-costs-for-civil-cases/)

Explains what fees and costs means in a civil case.

1345.5316

  * [ _Proceedings in civil court cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/proceedings-in-civil-court-cases/)

Civil court cases follow a standard format. Information on proceedings, how
witnesses are called and liability.

1246.1091

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

