**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Prison system
](/en/justice/prison-system/) > Being released from prison

#  Being released from prison

  * Introduction 
  * Remission 
  * Temporary release 
  * Parole 
  * Resettlement and reintegration 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you are serving a prison sentence in Ireland, there are several ways you
can be released into the community.

In addition to completing the full term of your sentence, you may be granted
periods of temporary or permanent release in recognition of good conduct in
custody, notably by engaging in authorised structured activities that are
designed to reduce your likelihood of reoffending.

This page outlines the ways you can be released from prison. It provides
information on:

  * Remission 
  * Temporary release 
  * Parole 
  * Resettlement and reintegration into the community 

You can find out more about how the [ prison system works in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-system/prison-system-
in-ireland/) and the [ educational and vocational training available
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-system/prison-
conditions/) to prisoners.

##  Remission

Remission is the complete ending of a sentence before the full term of your
sentence has been completed.

If you are in prison and part of your sentence is remitted (reduced), you are
released into the community without any further supervision or restrictions.

For example, if you were sentenced to 8 years in prison, you may be released
after 6 years because the remaining 2 years of your sentence have been
remitted.

Remission does not apply if you are:

  * Serving a life sentence (see ‘Parole’ below) 
  * In prison as a debtor or because of contempt of court 

There are 2 forms of remission set out under [ Article 59 of the Prison Rules
2007 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2007/si/252/made/en/print#article59)
: standard remission and enhanced remission.

###  Standard remission

Standard remission allows you to shorten the length of your sentence by up to
one quarter. In most cases, you get standard remission automatically once you
do not commit an offence in custody.

For example, if you are sentenced to 4 years in prison, you may be released
after 3 years, with the final quarter of your sentence remitted.

###  Enhanced remission

You can apply to the Minister for Justice for enhanced remission to reduce
your sentence by one third.

For example, if you are sentenced to 3 years in prison and you are granted
enhanced remission of one third of your sentence, you may be released after 2
years.

To be eligible for enhanced remission:

  * You must be able to demonstrate good behaviour (for example, by engaging in authorised structured activities in prison) 
  * The Minister for Justice must be satisfied that you are unlikely to reoffend and that you can reintegrate into the community upon release 

##  Temporary release

Temporary release means that you are released from prison for a specified
period of time for a specific purpose or reason.

The [ Criminal Justice Act 1960
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1960/act/27/enacted/en/print.html) allows
the Minister for Justice to grant temporary release to prisoners at any time
before they qualify for standard remission or to life-sentenced prisoners who
are not entitled to standard remission.

There are 3 general kinds of temporary release:

####  **1\. Compassionate grounds**

In most cases, you can be released on compassionate grounds if there is a
family emergency, such as a death or serious illness. You may also be released
to visit family at Christmas, or to attend special family occasions such as
christenings or communions.

####  **2\. Day-to-day release**

If you demonstrate good behaviour and engage in structured activities in
prison, you may be granted day-to-day release to participate in work or
training outside of prison during the day. You return to custody in the
evening.

You may also be granted day-release near the end of your sentence to build
family relationships before your release.

####  **3\. Full temporary release**

If your day-to-day temporary release has gone well and you have shown that you
can reintegrate into the community, the Minister for Justice may grant you
full temporary release.

In practice, this provision ends the custodial portion of your sentence unless
you are recalled to prison for any reason.

###  Eligibility for temporary release

When assessing an application for temporary release, the Minister will
consider several factors, including:

  * The nature and circumstances of the crime you committed 
  * Your behaviour in custody and on any previous period of temporary release 
  * The length of sentence served 
  * Whether you pose a threat to anyone, if released 
  * The risk of you not returning at the end of the temporary release 
  * Whether temporary release would help you reintegrate into society 

If you are granted temporary release, you must:

  * Keep the peace and maintain good behaviour 
  * Maintain sober habits 
  * Return to prison before the temporary release period expires 
  * Comply with any other condition imposed 

You will sign a release form acknowledging that:

  * You are aware of the terms and conditions of your release 
  * Those terms have been explained to you 
  * You are aware of the time when your period of release ends 

While you are outside the prison, you may be considered to be unlawfully at
large and may be arrested if your period of release has ended, or you break a
condition of your release.

####  **When discharged from prison**

If you are discharged from prison whether on temporary or permanent release,
the Governor must ensure that you have:

  * Enough money for travelling to your residence within the State 
  * Suitable clothing to wear 
  * Enough money to live on, as is considered appropriate in the circumstances 

###  **The Probation Service**

[ The Probation Service
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-and-welfare-
services/probation-service/) supervises and supports offenders in the
community. In most cases, the Probation Service [ supervises prisoners on
temporary release ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/probation-
and-welfare-services/probation-service/#32d292) .

You will be told about the Probation Service when you arrive in prison. An
officer may be assigned to work with you to address your offending behaviour
so that you can become eligible for temporary release at a later date.

For example, under the [ Community Return Scheme
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000037) , you can complete unpaid
work as a condition of your early release from prison. You need to pose no
threat to the community to be eligible for this scheme.

##  Parole

Parole is a form of early release from prison under certain conditions. If you
are released on parole, your sentence is not over – you are just serving your
sentence in the community.

You can apply for parole if you have served at least 10 and a half years of a
life sentence, but you cannot be granted parole unless you have served at
least 12 years of your sentence.

If you are released on parole, you must follow all the conditions of your
parole order. These conditions apply for the remaining time of your sentence.

You can be sent back to prison if you reoffend or break any of the conditions
of your parole order.

###  **The Parole Board**

[ The Parole Board ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/parole-board/) reviews
parole applications from prisoners serving life sentences. It is an
independent statutory body and the [ Board members
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/f2b2e-who-we-are/) are
appointed by the Minister for Justice.

The Parole Board must notify you when you become eligible for parole. You can
apply for parole once you become eligible. The Irish Prison Service keeps the
Parole Board updated on which prisoners are eligible to apply for parole.

You must meet the following criteria for parole:

  * You must have served at least 10 and a half years of your sentence before you can apply for parole 
  * You must have served at least 12 years of your life sentence before you can be granted parole 

Some offences, such as capital murder, certain sexual offences, drug and
gangland related offences are subject to minimum terms of imprisonment. You
will not be eligible for parole in these cases until that minimum sentence is
served.

When considering your application, the Parole Board may request reports from
relevant services, including:

  * [ The Irish Prison Service ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-system/prison-system-in-ireland/)
  * The Irish Prison Service Psychology Service 
  * The Probation Service 
  * [ An Garda Síochána ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/)
  * A psychiatrist and/or a psychologist 
  * Any other source relevant to your case 

You can read more about the parole process on [ the Parole Board’s website
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/7b385-apply-for-
parole/#:~:text=The%20Parole%20Board%20will%20make%20its%20decisions%20about,the%20following%2018%20months%20to%20the%20Parole%20Board.)
and in their [ information leaflet for parole applicants (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/197218/838f8f49-ca29-4041-9d68-e91b7e325d2b.pdf#page=null)
.

###  **Factors considered in a parole review**

In making its decisions, the Parole Board considers several factors,
including:

  * Whether you pose a threat to the community or a previous victim 
  * Whether you have been rehabilitated and are capable of reintegrating into society 
  * The nature and circumstances of the offence you committed 
  * Any recommendation made by the court at the time of sentencing 
  * Your behaviour in custody, particularly your engagement with therapeutic services designed to mitigate your offending behaviour 
  * The risk of you failing to comply with any conditions 
  * Submissions made by or on behalf of any victim 
  * Any compassionate grounds which merit special consideration 

###  **Second and subsequent reviews**

You may have to go through the parole process several times and show
meaningful progress before you are granted parole.

If your application is refused, you will be given the reasons for the refusal
in writing. You will also be told when you can next apply for parole, which
will be within 2 years of the refusal decision.

The Parole Board may also offer guidance in its refusal decision on what steps
you need to take to make a successful application in future.

###  **Legal Aid Scheme**

If you need legal representation while dealing with the Parole Board, you can
get financial support through the [ Parole Board’s Legal Aid Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ccef5-parole-board-legal-aid-scheme/) .
This is available to prisoners who are applying for parole or already on
parole, and also to relevant [ victims of crime
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-of-crime/) .

The scheme is not means tested. You can read more about [ the Parole Board’s
Legal Aid Scheme (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/236154/792ede63-d49b-443e-ae49-499852afe1a8.pdf#page=null)
.

####  **Victims of crime and the parole process**

If you are a victim of a crime where the offender has been sentenced to life
in prison, you can [ register with the Parole Board
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/7d2fb-information-for-victims-on-the-
parole-act-2019-and-the-parole-process/) . If you register and the offender
applies for parole, you will be asked if you wish to make a submission to the
Parole Board.

##  Resettlement and reintegration

###  **Irish Association for Social Inclusion Opportunities**

The Irish Prison Service works with [ the Irish Association for Social
Inclusion Opportunities (IASIO) ](http://www.iasio.ie/) to support you during
your release from prison so that you can reintegrate into the community.

IASIO [ provides 3 services ](http://www.iasio.ie/what-we-do/linkage-gate-
resettlement/) to support the reintegration process.

####  **The Linkage Service**

[ The Linkage Service ](https://www.iasio.ie/information-for-probation-
officers/iasio-services-in-the-community/) can help you with career guidance,
reading and writing skills, applying for college, and finding work.

You need to be referred to the service by your Probation Officer or Community
Service Supervisor.

####  **The ‘Gaining Access to Training and Employment’ (GATE) Service**

The GATE Service can provide guidance counselling and help you with finding
training or employment after your release from prison.

You need to have less than 18 months left on your sentence and you need to be
referred to the service by someone from the prison, such as the Governor,
Chief Officer, Chaplain, etc.

####  **The Resettlement Service**

The Resettlement Service can provide help with planning for life after prison,
accessing health services and emergency accommodation, and applying for
housing, medical cards and social welfare benefits.

You need to have less than 18 months left on your sentence and you need to be
referred to the service by someone from the prison, such as the Governor,
Chief Officer, Chaplain, etc.

###  **Other post-release supports**

You may get additional support from the Probation Service. They refer
offenders to [ community projects
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/Pages/WP16000065) around Ireland, to help them
to reintegrate and resettle in the community. You can find [ contact details
for local Probation Services
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/officecontactspage?readform) .

The Irish Penal Reform Trust has [ compiled a list of organisations
](https://www.iprt.ie/practical-information/who-can-provide-support/) across
Ireland which provide advice and support to prisoners and former prisoners.
There are also several organisations dedicated to [ supporting the families of
prisoners ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/prison-system-in-ireland/#5105ad) .

##  Further information

###  Irish Prison Service

IDA Business Park  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
Co. Longford  
Ireland

**Tel:** (043) 333 5100

**Fax:** (043) 333 5371

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irishprisons.ie ](http://www.irishprisons.ie)

**Email:** [ info@irishprisons.ie ](mailto:info@irishprisons.ie)

###  The Parole Board of Ireland

The Capel Building  
401 Mary's Abbey  
North City  
Dublin 7  
D07 N4C6

**Tel:** (01) 474 8767

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/parole-board/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/parole-board/)

**Email:** [ info@paroleboard.gov.ie ](mailto:info@paroleboard.gov.ie)

###  Probation Service

Haymarket  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 WT27  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 817 3600

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 872 2737

**Homepage:** [ http://www.probation.ie/ ](http://www.probation.ie/)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/officecontactspage?readform
](http://www.probation.ie/en/PB/officecontactspage?readform)

**Email:** [ psinfo@probation.ie ](mailto:psinfo@probation.ie)

###  Department of Justice

94 St. Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 602 8202

**Locall:** 1800 221 227

**Fax:** (01) 661 5461

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/)

**Email:** [ info@justice.ie ](mailto:info@justice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 22 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/being-released-from-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Being%20released%20from%20prison&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/being-released-from-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/being-released-from-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Being%20released%20from%20prison&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/being-released-from-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Assessing the means of a couple for social assistance payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-couple/)

Describes how the means of a couple are assessed for social assistance (means-
tested payments).

1043.4282

  * [ _Being asked to take a cut in pay or hours_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/being-asked-to-take-a-cut-in-pay-or-hours/)

In certain circumstances your employer may ask to cut your pay or hours of
work. This is a change to your contract of employment.

1042.9325

  * [ _Coming from the EU/EEA to work_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-from-eu-to-work/)

Details the rights of EU/EEA nationals to come to Ireland to work, and covers
rights while working.

1028.7344

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

