**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Representation in court

#  Representation in court

  * Introduction 
  * Solicitors 
  * Barristers 
  * Information a solicitor needs 
  * How to contact a solicitor 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you are involved in litigation or legal proceedings, you will probably need
legal representation. This is provided by a solicitor and, possibly, a
barrister.

You can learn more about accessing [ civil legal aid and advice
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) in
Ireland. You can also [ search the directory of solicitors firms
](http://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/) maintained
by the [ Law Society ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/) .

To enquire whether you are eligible for legal aid or advice [ from the Legal
Aid Board ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) , contact [
your nearest law centre
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/Publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres) . You
can also contact your [ nearest Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for information on [ FLAC (Free
Legal Advice Centres) ](http://www.flac.ie/) services in your area.

##  Solicitors

As well as representing people involved in litigation, solicitors provide
services that are not connected with court proceedings. For example, a
solicitor may assist you in the preparation and formalisation of your will or
with the legal transfer of your property (conveyancing).

Solicitors can advertise their services. They deal with the public, take
instructions from clients, do the necessary background work on cases, give
preliminary advice, obtain expert or specialist opinion if necessary and
instruct barristers if required.

The solicitor prepares the case for the trial. They may represent you in court
but will usually instruct a barrister to represent you in the higher courts.
This is done by sending the barrister a brief containing all the relevant
information and documentation to assist them in the presentation of the case.

You can [ read more about the role of solicitors
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) in the Irish justice system.

##  Barristers

Barristers, also known as Counsel, generally operate from the Law Library.
They cannot advertise or solicit clients and do not generally have direct
access to the public. They take their instructions from solicitors.

They provide legal advice of a specialist nature and generally represent the
client in court.

There is a distinction between Junior and Senior Counsel. Many junior
barristers consider becoming a Senior Counsel after about 15 years of
practice. Senior Counsel are barristers with greater experience or expertise.
They tend to do less drafting of court documents and spend more time giving
advice and conducting cases in the higher courts.

Find out more about [ the role of barristers
](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) in the Irish justice system.

##  Information a solicitor needs

You need to be well-prepared before you start to instruct a solicitor to make
sure you get the best outcome. For example, if you have been involved in an
accident that caused personal injury, the solicitor will need to know:

  * All the facts surrounding the accident 
  * All of the injuries you suffered as a result of the accident 
  * All of the expenses which the accident caused you to incur 

**Factual information**

If your accident occurred in the workplace, you will need to explain:

  * What you were doing at the time of the accident 
  * Who was in charge when the accident took place 
  * Who witnessed the accident 

If your accident was a road traffic accident, you will need to describe
clearly:

  * Where you were coming from or going to 
  * What the weather conditions were like 
  * What was the sequence of events leading up to the accident 
  * Whether you were wearing a seat-belt at the time of the accident 
  * What markings and signs were on the road 
  * Who was the investigating Garda 
  * What were the names and addresses of any witnesses 

**Personal injury details**

When describing your injuries, start with your sensations and feelings at the
time of and immediately after the accident. Then explain whether, when and how
you went to hospital.

Describe all injuries that you suffered, whether they were physical,
psychological or emotional, and all the symptoms, including sleep-loss and
nightmares. List all of the doctors, hospitals, physiotherapists and
counsellors (if any) that you attended after the accident.

If you already had injuries before the accident, you must inform your
solicitor of the details. Describe all of the treatments and medications you
received as a result of the accident and outline what your doctor thinks might
be the long-term effects of your injuries.

**Expenses**

Calculate any loss of earnings because you could not go to work and keep a
record of medical expenses like medication costs and doctors' bills. You
should also include related expenses such as bus and taxi-fares if you are
unable to drive as a result of the accident.

**Other types of claim**

Other types of claims need similar attention to detail in describing what
exactly happened. In a defamation case, it will be necessary to relate how
your reputation or good name has suffered. In a land case, a detailed
description of the history of the land in question and how the dispute arose
will be necessary.

##  How to contact a solicitor

People normally choose a particular solicitor because of a personal
recommendation, because the solicitor's office is in their area or because
they saw an advertisement.

It is usual to first telephone for an appointment with a solicitor. In some
family situations, it may be necessary to consider separate legal
representation for each spouse or partner.

The Law Society is the educational, representative and regulatory body of the
solicitors' profession in Ireland.

You can [ search the directory of solicitors firms
](http://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/) maintained
by the Law Society.

##  Further information

###  Law Society of Ireland

Blackhall Place  
Dublin  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6724800

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6724801

**Homepage:** [ http://www.lawsociety.ie ](http://www.lawsociety.ie)

**Email:** [ general@lawsociety.ie ](mailto:general@lawsociety.ie)

_**Page edited:** 20 August 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Representation%20in%20court&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Representation%20in%20court&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Legal representation in criminal cases_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/legal-representation-in-criminal-cases/)

The type of offence you are charged with determines what kind of legal
representation you will need in criminal cases. This page explains the types
of criminal offence and the duties of the defence counsel.

1293.06

  * [ _Functions and duties of individuals in a court of law_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/functions-and-duties-of-individuals-in-a-court-of-law/)

This document provides an introduction to the section outlining the different
functions and duties of individuals in a court of law.

1040.2189

  * [ _Proceedings in civil court cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/proceedings-in-civil-court-cases/)

Civil court cases follow a standard format. Information on proceedings, how
witnesses are called and liability.

984.3551

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

