**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Disclosure in criminal cases

#  Disclosure in criminal cases

  * Introduction 
  * Disclosure in summary prosecutions 
  * Disclosure if you are prosecuted on indictment 
  * What does the Book of Evidence contain? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

You can read about the process of a criminal trial on our website.

In a criminal trial the prosecution (the side accusing you) must disclose to
you all relevant evidence that it has before the trial starts. The prosecution
must share both:

  * The evidence the prosecution intends to use at your trial, and 
  * The evidence it has but does not intend to use if that evidence could help your defence. 

However, the duty to disclose is different for:

  * [ Summary prosecutions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases/) tried in the [ District Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) before a judge without a jury, and 
  * Prosecutions on indictment, tried before a judge and jury in the [ Circuit Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) or the [ Central Criminal Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) .   

##  Disclosure in summary prosecutions

In a summary prosecution, the prosecution does not generally have to give you
all the evidence, including any witness statements, beforehand, even if you
ask for them. However, you are entitled to the evidence that you clearly need
to get a fair trial.

If you apply to the court to get disclosure of certain evidence, the court
will decide if it is in the interest of justice to give them to you.

When deciding to release evidence, the prosecution must consider similar
principles.

If you ask for particular items of evidence, you or your lawyer must explain
why you need advance disclosure of these.

##  Disclosure if you are prosecuted on indictment

For a trial on indictment, before your trial the prosecution must give you
certain materials which set out the evidence they intend to use in the trial
against you. These documents are usually referred to as the [ Book of Evidence
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/disclosure-in-criminal-cases/) .

**When should you get the Book of Evidence?**

When the [ Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-of-crime/director-of-
public-prosecutions/) agrees to send you forward for trial, the DPP must
normally give the Book of Evidence to you (or your solicitor) **within 42
days** after you first appear in the District Court.

**Book of evidence time period extension**

The DPP can apply to the District Court to extend the 42 day period and
normally the District Court will give this extension if:

  * There is a good reason for doing so and 
  * It would be in the interest of justice to do so 

The law does not set any limit on the length of the extension. There must,
however, be a good reason for giving the extension, such as, if the [ Garda
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-
siochana-national-police-force/) investigation is complex and there are a lot
of witnesses involved in the case.

If the District Court refuses to extend the time to provide the Book of
Evidence, the court must strike out the proceedings against you for the
offence. This does not always mean that your case is over or finished. The DPP
can bring you before the court again on the same charges.

**Giving notice of your alibi**

An alibi is evidence that you were somewhere else when the criminal offence
took place.

If you plan to rely on the evidence of any alibi at your trial, you must give
notice of the alibi to the prosecution **within 14 days** of being served the
Book of Evidence.

##  What does the Book of Evidence contain?

###

The Book of Evidence contains these documents which must be served on you or
your solicitor:

  * A statement of the charges against you 
  * A copy of any sworn information (in writing) upon which the proceedings were started, that is, the written complaint made by a Garda 
  * A list of the [ witnesses ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/types-of-witnesses/) whom the DPP proposes to call at the trial 
  * A statement of the evidence that is expected to be given by each witness at the trial 
  * A copy of documentary evidence complied in the ordinary course of business which the DPP wishes to use 
  * A list of any exhibits (physical items of evidence) to be used at the trial. 

When the Book of Evidence is prepared, it is served on you. The DPP can serve
additional documents on you at a later stage.

At any time afterwards, the DPP must serve certain documents on you if they
exist. These additional documents include:

  * A list of any further witnesses the DPP proposes to call at the trial 
  * A statement of the evidence that is expected to be given by each witness whose name appears on the list of further witnesses 
  * A statement of any further evidence that is expected to be given by any witness whose name appears on the earlier witness list 
  * A copy of any further documentary evidence gathered in the ordinary course of business which the DPP wishes to use 
  * A list of any further exhibits 

You have the right to inspect all exhibits mentioned in the list of exhibits.

###  Who creates the Book of Evidence?

While the Book of Evidence is gathered and served on behalf of the DPP, it is
normally the investigating Garda who puts the Book of Evidence together. Work
on the Book of Evidence starts immediately after your first appearance before
the District Court.

The Gardaí can take a long time to put together a book of evidence especially
if the case is complex and there are many witnesses.

###  **Witness statements and evidence**

Normally, most of the type of documents in a Book of Evidence are [ witness
statements
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/admissibility-of-
witness-statements-in-a-criminal-trial/) . Statements from Gardaí, [ witnesses
](/en/justice/witnesses/) to the crime and expert witnesses (such as forensic
experts and medical experts). These are all gathered by the investigating
Garda to list in the Book of Evidence.

###  **Is all the collected material disclosed?**

The prosecution may have other evidence that it intends not to use at your
trial. Disclosure of this evidence should be made to you, without a request,
if the evidence is relevant to your defence.

##  Further information

You can get further information on disclosure in the [ Guidelines for
Prosecutors (pdf) ](https://www.dppireland.ie/publication-category/guidelines-
for-prosecutors/) on the [ Director of Public Prosecution’s website
](http://www.dppireland.ie/) .

You can find out more about the [ different types of evidence
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/) that can be used in
trials. You can read more about [ witnesses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/) .

_**Page edited:** 18 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/disclosure-in-criminal-
cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Disclosure%20in%20criminal%20cases&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/disclosure-in-criminal-
cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/disclosure-in-criminal-
cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Disclosure%20in%20criminal%20cases&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/disclosure-in-criminal-cases/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Right to silence in criminal cases_ ](/en/justice/arrests/right-to-silence-in-criminal-cases/)

The Irish Constitution provides protection for everyone against self-
incrimination. Find out more.

1817.8853

  * [ _Classification of crimes in criminal cases_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases/)

The way in which a criminal offence is investigated and prosecuted depends on
the type of crime involved. For these purposes criminal offences may be
described in different ways.

1752.0887

  * [ _Admissibility of witness statements in a criminal trial_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/admissibility-of-witness-statements-in-a-criminal-trial/)

What happens if a witness refuses to give evidence in a criminal trial? This
law on this area is covered by the Criminal Justice Act 2006.

1694.0619

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

