**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Drug Offenders Register

#  Drug Offenders Register

  * Introduction 
  * When do I have to notify the Gardaí? 
  * Offenders under 18 
  * Can I apply to have the notification requirements cancelled? 

##  Introduction

Part 9 of the [ Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0026/index.html) came into
force in October 2006 and introduced new obligations on those who have been
convicted of [ drug trafficking offences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
offences/drug-offences/) to notify Gardaí of certain information about
themselves. This provision is based on the same principle as the [ Sex
Offenders Register ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-
register/) and enables the movements of convicted drug dealers to be recorded
in a similar fashion. Furthermore, the Register assists the Gardaí in
monitoring illegal activity and provides useful intelligence on convicted
offenders.

This document sets out the duties of offenders to notify the Gardaí.
Information on penalties for those who fail to comply is also provided.

##  When do I have to notify the Gardaí?

If you are convicted of a drug trafficking offence you are required to notify
the Gardaí of certain information about yourself within 7 days. When you
receive a term of imprisonment following a drug conviction, your duty to
notify the Gardaí doesn’t begin until after you are released from prison. You
then have 7 days from the date of release to notify the Gardaí. The Governor
of the prison is obliged to notify the Gardaí at least 10 days before your
release that you are going to be released.

###  What information must I give the Gardaí?

When an order is made by a court requiring you to notify Gardaí you are
obliged to supply the following information in order to comply with the
requirements:

  * Your name and if you use another name(s), each of those names 
  * Your home address 
  * If you change your name from the one previously given to the Gardaí then you must provide that new name within 7 days of any such change of name 
  * Any change of your home address 
  * If you intend to leave the state for a continuous period of 7 days or more then you must notify the Gardaí of your intention and of where they intend to stay while outside the state 
  * Your date of birth 

###  How long do the requirements to notify the Gardaí last for?

It depends on the length of sentence you receive from the court. The longer
the sentence, the longer the requirements last. The following is a guide to
the length of time the requirements last:

  * 12 years: if you were imprisoned for life 
  * 7 years: if you were imprisoned more than 10 years (but not imprisonment for life) 
  * 5 years: if you were imprisoned for more than 5 years (but not more than 10 years) 
  * 3 years: if you were imprisoned for more than one year (but not more than 5 years) 
  * 1 year: if your imprisonment is suspended by the court 

If you are not given a sentence of imprisonment of one year or more, you are
not subject to the notification requirements.

###  What happens when someone fails to comply with the notification
requirements?

Anyone who fails (without reasonable excuse), to comply with the notification
requirement is guilty of an offence. The penalty is a fine of up to €4,000 or
imprisonment for up to 12 months, or both.

###  Do these notification requirements apply to persons convicted outside the
state?

Yes they do. If you are convicted of a drug trafficking offence outside
Ireland where that offence would constitute a drug trafficking offence in
Ireland, you are subject to the same Garda notification requirements if you
subsequently come to live in Ireland. If you fail to notify the Gardaí of your
details, then the Gardaí can prosecute you for non-compliance or failure to
comply with the requirements. The Gardaí, however, have to produce a document
to the court proving the particulars of your conviction abroad.

##  Offenders under 18

Those under 18 years at time of sentencing are also obliged to notify the
Gardaí – but the periods are shorter. They are as follows:

  * 6 years: if you were imprisoned for life 
  * 3.5 years: if you were imprisoned more than 10 years (but not imprisonment for life) 
  * 2.5 years: if you were imprisoned for more than 5 years (but not more than 10 years) 
  * 1.5 years: if you were imprisoned for more than one year (but not more than 5 years) 
  * 6months: if your imprisonment is suspended by the court 

##  Can I apply to have the notification requirements cancelled?

Anyone subject to the requirements for a period of 12 years (or 6 years in the
case of someone under 18 years of age) can apply to the court for an order
discharging them from having to notify the Gardaí on the grounds that the
interests of the common good is not being served by you being obliged to
continue to notify. The application can be made once 8 years (or 4 years in
the case of someone under 18 years of age) has passed.

You should apply to the court which imposed the prison sentence originally.
The application may be made by you or by a [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) on your behalf. Court staff will assist
in making the application if you have any difficulties. There is no charge for
an application.

Anyone applying to the court is allowed to bring forward any witness to the
court who will give evidence on their behalf or in regard to their character,
for example, a doctor who had treated you or the director of a drugs
rehabilitation programme which you attended.

If you intend to apply to the court for a discharge of the requirements to
report to the Gardaí, you must notify the Superintendent of the local Garda
station of your intention to make an application to the court.

Anyone subject to requirements for a period of 7 years or less (or 3½ years in
the case of someone under 18 years of age) cannot apply to have the
requirements cancelled.

_**Page edited:** 23 September 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Drug%20Offenders%20Register&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Drug%20Offenders%20Register&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Registering the birth of your baby_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/)

Find out how to register the birth of your baby in Ireland and how to get a
copy of a birth certificate.

1822.313

  * [ _The Foreign Births Register_ ](/en/moving-country/irish-citizenship/foreign-births-register/)

If your grandparents were born in Ireland, but you were born abroad, your
birth must be registered in the Foreign Births Register to claim Irish
citizenship. This document explains how to do this.

1820.9294

  * [ _Monitoring and treatment of sex offenders in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/)

This document provides information about the treatment and monitoring of sex
offenders in Ireland. It includes detail on the sex offenders register, post-
release supervision orders, sex offender orders and the treatment of sex
offenders in prison.

1563.4729

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

