**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Crime and
crime prevention ](/en/justice/crime-and-crime-prevention/) > Seniors Alert
Scheme

#  Seniors Alert Scheme

  * Introduction 
  * Who is eligible for the scheme? 
  * What type of equipment can I get? 
  * How to Apply 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The Seniors Alert Scheme provides funding for a free personal monitored alarm
for people aged 65 and older and of limited means. The scheme is intended to
support older people to live securely and independently in their homes.

The Seniors Alert Scheme is administered by [ Pobal
](https://www.pobal.ie/Pages/Home.aspx) , a not-for-profit company that
manages programmes on behalf of the Irish Government and the EU.

You must contact a community or voluntary group in your area who are [
registered with Pobal ](https://www.pobal.ie/programmes/seniors-alert-scheme-
sas/) to access the scheme (see ‘How to apply’ below).

##  Who is eligible for the scheme?

To be eligible for the Seniors Alert Scheme, you must be aged 65 or over and
have limited means or resources.

You must also be any of the following:

  * Living alone 
  * Living alone for significant periods of time during the day 
  * Living with someone who meets the criteria 
  * Caring for someone else in your household 

You must live in the area covered by the registered group administering the
funding and be able to benefit from the equipment being supplied. You also
need to be willing to keep contact with the registered group.

###  Costs

All equipment and installation under the scheme is free. The alarm monitoring
service is free for the first year. After the first year, you will be asked to
pay the annual monitoring fee.

The annual monitoring fee will vary by service provider and the type of alarm
or pendant supplied. Your local group can tell you about the cost in advance.

If there is no suitable landline available in your home and a mobile signal is
used to connect to the equipment, you may have to pay a fee for mobile SIM
rental.

##  What type of equipment can I get?

Funding is available to buy and install monitored personal alarms, which can
be worn as a pendant or around your wrist like a watch. These alarms connect
to a national helpline through a base unit installed in your home.

When the alarm is activated, it automatically rings the helpline, which is
open 24 hours a day all year round. A helpline operator talks to you in your
home and decides whether to alert a local volunteer responder or, if
necessary, the emergency services.

Equipment supplied under the scheme remains the property of the registered
group and must be returned to the group if no longer needed.

###  How do I get the equipment?

You must contact a community or voluntary group registered in your area.

The registered community or voluntary group will:

  * Assess your eligibility for the scheme and complete the application form with you 
  * Identify the equipment required and get quotations from suppliers 
  * Submit the application and supporting documentation to Pobal 

You will be asked to confirm that you understand the purpose and use of the
equipment and that you will be responsible for the annual monitoring fee after
the first year.

##  How to Apply

Registered community or voluntary groups apply to Pobal on the older persons
behalf. Pobal does not accept applications from individuals.

If you feel you may be eligible for the Seniors Alert Scheme, you should
contact the group registered to operate the scheme in your area. Pobal
publishes [ a list of registered organisations on its website
](https://www.pobal.ie/programmes/seniors-alert-scheme-sas/) .

You can also contact Pobal at the address below for details of your local
group. Groups wishing to register for the scheme can register online at [
pobal.ie ](https://sas.pobal.ie/SitePages/Home.aspx) .

###  What groups can register as providers of the scheme?

Community, voluntary and not-for-profit organisations can apply to register
with Pobal for the scheme. They must have a recognised structure and be able
to show that they can manage the grants. They must also have a record of
working with older people in the community.

A group will not be able to register if there is an existing group operating
the scheme in the area.

##  Further information

[ Detailed information on the Seniors Alert Scheme
](https://www.pobal.ie/FundingProgrammes/Seniors Alert Scheme/Pages/Seniors
Alert Scheme.aspx) is available on Pobal’s website.

For further information, you can contact the Seniors Alert Scheme section in
Pobal at the address below, or by email at [ onlinesupport@pobal.ie
](mailto:onlinesupport@pobal.ie) .

###  Pobal

Holbrook House  
Holles Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 EY84  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 511 7000

**Fax:** (01) 511 7981

**Homepage:** [ http://www.pobal.ie/ ](http://www.pobal.ie/)

**Email:** [ enquiries@pobal.ie ](mailto:enquiries@pobal.ie)

_**Page edited:** 4 June 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/seniors-alert/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Seniors%20Alert%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/seniors-alert/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/seniors-alert/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Seniors%20Alert%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/seniors-alert/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)

Overview of the employment schemes and other supports which encourage people
getting unemployment and certain other social welfare payments to take up
employment.

999.7543

  * [ _Ready to Build Scheme_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/ready-to-build-scheme/)

Under the Ready to Build Scheme, you can buy a site from a local authority at
a discounted price to build your own home on.

943.1669

  * [ _Help to Buy Scheme_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-scheme/)

The Help to Buy Scheme offers a tax refund for first-time buyers of newly-
built homes.

943.1669

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

