**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Crime and
crime prevention ](/en/justice/crime-and-crime-prevention/) > Reporting drug
dealing

#  Reporting drug dealing

  * Introduction 
  * Dial to Stop Drug Dealing 
  * How to report suspicions of drugdealing 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Drug dealing is a serious problem affecting many communities. One of the
biggest barriers to dealing effectively with drug dealers is the use of
intimidation by drug dealers to prevent people from reporting drug dealing.

##  Dial to Stop Drug Dealing

Dial to Stop Drug Dealing is an initiative to tackle drug dealing in local
communities around Ireland. It provides a confidential and completely
anonymous way for individuals to pass on information on drug dealing in their
local community. When people are reporting drug dealing activity, they are
never asked for their names or addresses, or any other information which might
identify them.

##  How to report suspicions of drugdealing

Anyone wishing to pass on information on drug dealing should call the [
Crimestoppers ](https://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/WP15000275) freephone
confidential number **1800 25 00 25** or the Garda Confidential freephone
number **1800 666 111** .

If you have information on drug dealing activity in your community you can
telephone the freephone number. You will get through to a trained operator who
will ask you for your information and nothing more. The calls are handled by
staff that have been trained to deal with the sensitivities around the issue.
You will not be asked for your name and your number will not be traced. No one
will know that you have called.

The information gathered is passed on directly to the [ Garda National Drugs
and Organised Crime Bureau (GNDOCB) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-
us/organised-serious-crime/garda-national-drugs-and-organised-crime-bureau/)
which assesses its usefulness. The GNDOCB passes relevant information on to
the Gardaí in the specified area for investigation. The Gardaí can use the
information to build a case against a known drug dealer, to investigate new
allegations of drug dealing activity in a community or to make an arrest.

##  Further information

There is information on the [ Government’s strategy for dealing with the drug
problem (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/14571/c22d1dd1756440f8946717a80ad2ffc3.pdf#page=1)
. There is information on the [ Drug Related Intimidation Reporting Programme
](https://www.garda.ie/en/Crime/Drugs/The-Drugs-Related-Intimidation-
Reporting-Programme.html) on the Garda website.

_**Page edited:** 26 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/reporting-drug-dealing/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Reporting%20drug%20dealing&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/reporting-drug-dealing/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/reporting-drug-dealing/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Reporting%20drug%20dealing&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/reporting-drug-dealing/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Dealing with a deceased person’s money and property_ ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/)

Find out about the steps involved in taking out probate or letters of
administration in Ireland.

1458.574

  * [ _Prescribed drugs and medicines_ ](/en/health/drugs-and-medicines/prescribed-drugs-and-medicines/)

Irish residents are entitled to either free or subsidised approved prescribed
drugs and medicines and certain medical and surgical aids and appliances.

1421.322

  * [ _Drug Offenders Register_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/)

The Drug Offenders Register was introduced by the Criminal Justice Act 2006
and is based on the same principle as the Sex Offenders Register. It enables
the movements of convicted drug dealers to be recorded.

1410.6504

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

