**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Victims of
crime ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/) > Victims of crime and the law

#  Victims of crime and the law

  * Introduction 
  * Witnesses 
  * Victims of violent crimes 
  * Human trafficking 
  * Victims' rights 
  * Other relevant legislation 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

There are several laws that deal with the rights of victims of crime in
Ireland. On this page, you can read about some of these laws. They are grouped
together by subject matter.

##  Witnesses

###  Criminal Evidence Act 1992

The [ Criminal Evidence Act 1992
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1992/act/12/enacted/en/html) makes it
easier for witnesses to give evidence in physical or sexual abuse cases by
allowing for a [ live television link ](/en/justice/witnesses/remote-hearings-
and-video-link-evidence/) with the court. In some cases, this Act forces the
spouse of the accused to give evidence for the prosecution.

The Act makes it easier for children to give evidence by getting rid of:

  * The need to give evidence on oath 
  * The need for corroboration (previously, additional evidence confirming the evidence given by the child was needed) 
  * The wearing of wigs and gowns by barristers when evidence is being given by video link 

###  Criminal Justice Act 1999

The [ Criminal Justice Act 1999
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1999/act/10/enacted/en/html) deals with
the protection of witnesses, including victims, who may have to give evidence
in court.

It allows witnesses who are in fear or subject to intimidation to give
evidence by a live video link.

It also makes it an offence to intimidate a witness, a jury member or any
person helping the Gardaí with a criminal investigation. The penalty is up to
15 years imprisonment.

##  Victims of violent crimes

###  Criminal Justice Act 1993

The [ Criminal Justice Act 1993
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1993/act/6/enacted/en/print.html) forces
the court to consider the effect of a violent or sexual offence on the victim
when it is deciding the [ sentence ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/sentence/) .

If you are a victim of a violent or sexual offence, you are also entitled to
give evidence in court about how the crime affected you.

The Act allows the Director of Public Prosecutions to appeal lenient
sentences. It also gives the court the power to force the offender to pay
compensation to the victim for any personal injury or loss suffered.

###  Civil Legal Aid Act 1995

Under [ Civil Legal Aid Act 1995
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/act/32/enacted/en/html) , the [
Legal Aid Board ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) provides
legal aid or advice to a _complainant_ in [ certain criminal cases
](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-services/common-
legal-problems/rape-and-sexual-assault/) involving prosecution for a range of
sexual offences, including rape, aggravated sexual assault and incest. A
complainant is the person making the complaint.

The Board also provides legal advice in relation to criminal matters to
alleged victims of [ human trafficking ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-
services/legal-aid-services/common-legal-problems/human-trafficking/) .

###  Domestic Violence Act 2018

The [ Domestic Violence Act 2018
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/act/6/enacted/en/html) consolidates
previous domestic violence legislation. It provides protection where there is
a violent family member.

The main kinds of protection available are:

  * [ Safety orders ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders#l80820)
  * [ Barring orders ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders#l59761)

**A safety order** prohibits the violent person from further violence or
threats of violence. It does not oblige the person to leave the family home.
If the person does not live with you, it prohibits them from watching or being
near your home, or communicating with you (including electronic
communication).

**A barring order** requires the violent person to leave the family home. The
order also prohibits the person from further violence or threats of violence,
and from watching or being near your home or communicating with you (including
electronic communication).

There are [ other orders that can be put in place ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-
and-protection-orders/) which are temporary.

###  **Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Human Trafficking) Act 2024**

From 31 August 2024, the [ Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Human
Trafficking) Act 2024
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/act/28/enacted/en/html) changes
what happens during the criminal proceedings for sexual offences, including:

  * Ensuring anonymity for both victims and the accused in all sexual offence trials 
  * Excluding the public from the court room 
  * Extending the victim’s right of separate legal representation and legal aid if they are being questioned about their previous sexual history 
  * Ensuring character evidence at a sentencing hearing for a person convicted of a sexual offence must be made under oath or by way of affidavit 

This page will be updated when further detail becomes available.

##  Human trafficking

###  Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008

The [ Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008
](https://https/www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2008/act/8/www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2008/act/8)
makes it an offence to [ traffic in adults or children ](/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/human-trafficking/) for the purpose of their sexual or
labour exploitation, or for the removal of their organs.

It also makes it an offence to sell or purchase, or offer to sell or purchase,
any person for any purpose. It is also an offence to solicit a trafficked
person for prostitution.

###  Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) (Amendment) Act 2013

This [ amendment to the Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2013/act/24/enacted/en/index.html) makes
it an offence to traffic in adults or children for the purpose of forcing them
to engage in criminality, labour, enslavement and begging.

###  **Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Human Trafficking) Act 2024**

When the relevant sections of the [ Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Human
Trafficking) Act 2024
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/act/28/enacted/en/html) are
commenced it will put the new [ National Referral Mechanism
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/27823-government-approves-proposal-for-
a-revised-national-referral-mechanism-to-make-it-easier-for-human-trafficking-
victims-to-come-forward-and-receive-supports/) (NRM) for human trafficking
victims on a statutory footing.

Under the new scheme, several state and non-governmental organisations are to
join with An Garda Síochána in identifying victims of human trafficking and
providing them with access to the range of support services available through
the NRM.

Read more about [ human trafficking
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-and-crime-
prevention/human-trafficking/) on our website.

##  Victims' rights

###  Criminal Justice (Victims of Crime) Act 2017

The [ Criminal Justice (Victims of Crime) Act 2017
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2017/act/28/enacted/en/html) puts [ EU
legislation on the rights of victims of crime
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b9418-criminal-justice-victims-of-crime-
act-2017/) into Irish law. It sets out the minimum rights, supports and
protections for victims of crime, including:

  * The right to be given detailed information about the criminal justice system 
  * The right to be given information on [ victim support services ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/support-services-for-victims-of-crime/)
  * The right to be kept informed of the progress of the investigation and any court proceedings 
  * The right to have protection needs assessed and have measures put in place to stop further victimisation and intimidation 
  * The right to be told of a decision not to prosecute and the right to ask for a review of that decision 
  * The right to be given information in clear language and to have access to interpretation and translation services if needed 

You can read more about [ your rights as a victim of crime
](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/your-rights-as-a-victim-of-crime/) .

##  Other relevant legislation

###  Bail Act 1997

The [ Bail Act 1997
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/act/16/enacted/en/html) tightened
up the [ bail ](/en/justice/arrests/bail-and-surety/) regime. A court can
refuse bail to a person charged with a serious offence if it is likely that
the person may commit another serious offence while they are on bail. In
addition, the Act requires a court to impose consecutive sentences when an
offence is committed on bail.

If [ An Garda Síochána ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-
police-force/) suspects that somebody has or is about to breach a bail-bond,
and if they believe that person may pose a threat to a victim or witness
involved in the case, the Gardaí can arrest the person without a warrant.

###  Criminal Law (Defence and the Dwelling) Act 2011

The [ Criminal Law (Defence and the Dwelling) Act 2011
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2011/act/35/enacted/en/html) provides
that people are entitled to use reasonable force in defence of people and
property if they believe that an intruder has entered their dwelling to commit
a criminal act.

##  Further information

For further information about the legislation relating to victims of crime,
you can contact the [ Department of Justice
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/) . You can also
learn more about your rights and entitlements as a victim of crime on [ the
Victims Charter website ](https://www.victimscharter.ie/) .

###  Department of Justice

94 St. Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 602 8202

**Locall:** 1800 221 227

**Fax:** (01) 661 5461

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/)

**Email:** [ info@justice.ie ](mailto:info@justice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/victims-and-the-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Victims%20of%20crime%20and%20the%20law&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/victims-and-the-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/victims-and-the-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Victims%20of%20crime%20and%20the%20law&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/victims-and-the-law/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Compensation for victims of crime_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/compensation-for-victims-of-crime/)

Find out about how to get compensation if you have been a victim of crime.

1772.3285

  * [ _Support services for victims of crime_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/support-services-for-victims-of-crime/)

An outline of services available to support victims of crime.

1709.763

  * [ _Alcohol and the law_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/alcohol-and-the-law/)

Laws are in place regarding the serving of alcohol on licensed premises and
off-licences, drinking in public and drink driving.

1111.7991

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

