**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Notaries public

#  Notaries public

  * Information 
  * Further information 

##  Information

A notary public is a public officer who serves the public in non-contentious
matters usually concerned with foreign or international business. Notaries are
[ appointed by the Chief Justice ](https://www.courts.ie/content/appointment-
chief-justice-notaries-public-0) . In general only solicitors are appointed.

###  What do notaries public do?

Notaries certify the execution in their presence of a deed, a contract or
other writing. They can also verify some act or thing done in their presence.
Among the things they do are:

  * Authenticating documents 
  * Witnessing and proving signatures to documents 
  * Administering oaths 
  * Taking affidavits (other than for the courts in Ireland) 
  * Drawing up Powers of Attorney and other legal documents customarily prepared by notaries public 

###  When am I likely to need the services of a notary public?

You are most likely to require a notary where you have to send papers or
documents to a foreign jurisdiction. You may require the services of a notary
in relation to:

  * Foreign adoption papers 
  * Affidavits for use in foreign courts 
  * Copies of State documents for use abroad 
  * International contracts 
  * Powers of Attorney 

###  How do I find a notary public?

A notary may notarise documents in the county where their principal office is
situated and also in some adjoining counties. If the notary you choose will be
required to notarise documents outside their county, you should check they are
authorised to sign and notarise documents in that place. You can find a [ list
of notaries public ](http://www.notarypublic.ie/finding-a-notary/) on the
website of the Faculty of Notaries Public in Ireland (see below).

When meeting a notary you will be required to prove your identity and
residence. You will be required to bring several forms of identification such
as your passport and a recent utility bill.

###  Who regulates notaries public?

The Faculty of Notaries Public in Ireland promotes and regulates the
profession of notary public in Ireland. There is a [ code of conduct (pdf)
](http://notarypublic.ie/download/Code_Of_Conduct.pdf) that notaries are
required to follow.

##  Further information

Further information on notaries public is available on the Facultyâ€™s website.

###  The Faculty of Notaries Public in Ireland

109 Ranelagh  
Dublin 6  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 497 3611

**Fax:** (01) 496 4769

**Homepage:** [ http://www.notarypublic.ie/ ](http://www.notarypublic.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@notarypublic.ie ](mailto:info@notarypublic.ie)

_**Page edited:** 19 August 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/notaries-public/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Notaries%20public&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/notaries-public/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/notaries-public/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Notaries%20public&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/notaries-public/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Travelling on public transport with a disability or reduced mobility_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/travelling-publictransport-with-disability/)

Information on public transport accessibility services for people with a
disability or reduced mobility.

1205.9261

  * [ _Public order offences_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/public-order-offenses-in-ireland/)

The law on public order offences is mainly set down in the Criminal Justice
(Public Order) Act 1994. It deals with how people behave in public places and
also provides for crowd control at public events. Find out more about the
different types of offences.

1146.7382

  * [ _Re-use of Public Sector Information_ ](/en/about/reuse-psi/)

Information about how to re-use content from the Citizens Information website.
You are free to re-use or re-produce content provided you acknowledge the
source.

1093.9456

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

