**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Mediation and settlement of claims

#  Mediation and settlement of claims

  * Introduction 
  * Mediation 
  * Settlement 
  * Lodgements 

##  Introduction

Mediation is a confidential, facilitative and voluntary process in which
parties to a dispute, with the assistance of a mediator, attempt to reach a
mutually acceptable agreement to resolve the dispute.

##  Mediation

Before you can begin legal proceedings in a court, your solicitor must advise
you to consider mediation as possible means of resolving the underlying
dispute involving an independent mediator. The solicitor will also set out the
advantages of mediation and discuss its suitability for the dispute at hand.
Solicitors are also obliged to provide details of possible mediators. Whether
or not you decide to enter into mediation with the other side is your own
choice.

Parties may also agree to enter mediation at any stage after legal proceedings
have begun.

A court may also suggest that the matter may be better resolved through
mediation. If such a recommendation is made by a court, any failure to explore
mediation may be reflected in the costs order made by the court at the
conclusion of the proceedings.

##  Settlement

Once a claim has been made, a settlement between all the parties can be
reached either prior to the trial date or on the day of the trial ("on the
steps of the courtroom").

If the defendant wishes to offer you money to end your claim and you are
agreeable to settling your case out of court, your solicitor may arrange a
settlement meeting with the defendant's legal representatives prior to the
trial date.

At the meeting, [ your legal representatives ](/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/) will explain to you the advantages and
disadvantages of accepting the offer made by the defendant and will give you
advice about your chances of success at trial and the amount of damages you
may receive in court.

The advantage to settling your case is that it removes the risk of losing the
case and/or having to pay the costs of the case. There is no guarantee that a
court will award you more damages than the sum offered by the defendant.

Your solicitor or your barrister will negotiate with the defendant's legal
representatives to reach a sum that is acceptable to all sides. Usually the
issue of who is to pay your legal costs is dealt with. You are not obliged to
accept the advice of your solicitor or barrister or to settle your claim and
the final decision will always be yours.

However, if you do agree to a settlement then that decision is final, the case
proceeds no further and you have forfeited your claim in return for the
mutually agreed sum. It is often the case that the terms of any settlement can
be made the subject of a court order or lodged in court to make it easier to
enforce the settlement agreement.

If the claim is made in the name of a child or a person who lacks mental
capacity, any settlement must be approved by the court.

##  Lodgements

If an offer is made in settlement of your claim and you refuse that offer, the
defendant may _lodge_ that amount in court.

If at the end of the case the judge awards an amount that is less than the
lodgement, you will generally be obliged to pay all of the legal costs of both
sides since the date of the lodgement.

_**Page edited:** 29 May 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/mediation-and-settlement-of-claims/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Mediation%20and%20settlement%20of%20claims&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/mediation-and-settlement-of-claims/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/mediation-and-settlement-of-claims/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Mediation%20and%20settlement%20of%20claims&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/mediation-and-settlement-of-claims/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Small claims procedure_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/small-claims-court/)

The small claims procedure provides an inexpensive, fast and easy way for
consumers to resolve disputes without a solicitor. Find out how the procedure
operates.

934.05884

  * [ _Referring small claims to court_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/referring-small-claims-to-court/)

If your small claims procedure case cannot be resolved it may be referred for
a hearing in the District Court.

878.044

  * [ _European small claims procedure_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/european-small-claims-procedure/)

The European Small Claims Procedure provides an inexpensive and easy way for
someone to pursue a cross-border claim without the need to employ a solicitor.

827.1158

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

