**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal offences ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/) > Fireworks: the law

#  Fireworks: the law

  * Introduction 
  * Categories of fireworks 
  * What are the penalties for having a firework? 
  * Fireworks and Garda powers 
  * Labelling of fireworks 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Fireworks include items which burn and explode to produce noise or a visual
effect for entertainment. Sparklers, bangers, fountains and rockets are all
fireworks.

Most fireworks can only be bought and used by professional, licenced
operators. Only the least dangerous fireworks can be sold to the general
public.

Fireworks are dangerous. You need a licence to import them to Ireland and the
way they are stored and sold is regulated by laws on explosives.

##  Categories of fireworks

Fireworks are divided into 4 categories. The least dangerous is Category F1
and the most dangerous is Category F4.

###  Category F1 fireworks

Category F1 fireworks can be bought and used by the general public. These are
called very low hazard fireworks.

F1 fireworks:

  * Pose the least danger 
  * Make very little noise 
  * Are for use in a limited space (including indoors) 

Examples include party poppers, ground spinners, Christmas crackers and some
sparklers. Importers of these fireworks must have a licence (except for
Christmas crackers).

Category F1 fireworks can be dangerous and their use should be supervised. F1
fireworks cannot be sold to anyone under the age of 12.

**Bangers are not in Category F1 and it is illegal for the general public to
import, possess or use them.**

###  More dangerous fireworks

Fireworks in other categories are more dangerous and can only be used by
professional operators in organised displays, not by the general public.

These fireworks include rockets, roman candles and aerial wheels. If you want
to organise a display of these types of firework, you must use a professional
fireworks operator.

##  What are the penalties for having a firework?

Category F1 fireworks can be bought and used by the general public. Apart from
Christmas crackers, a licence is needed to import F1 fireworks.

It is illegal to import, hold, sell or use any other fireworks without a
licence.

It is an offence to:

  * Light an unlicensed firework 
  * Throw a lit firework at a person or property, except for low-hazard (F1) fireworks 
  * Have an unlicensed firework 
  * Have an unlicensed firework with the intention of selling it or giving it to someone else 

These offences are specified in [ Section 80 of the Explosives Act 1875,
](http://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2006/act/26/revised/en/html#id1152029037.42)
as amended by the [ Section 68 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/26/section/68/enacted/en/html) .

These are [ arrestable offences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases#l43888) . The Gardaí can
arrest you without a warrant if they suspect you of having committed an
offence under this Act (see ‘Fireworks and Garda powers’ below).

If you are found guilty of any of the above offences:

  * On summary conviction (in the [ District Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) ), you are liable to a [ class C fine ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/) or to a prison sentence of up to 6 months, or to both 
  * On conviction on indictment (in the [ Circuit Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) ), you are liable to a maximum fine of €10,000 or to a prison sentence of up to 5 years, or to both 

##  Fireworks and Garda powers

The Gardaí have wide powers to investigate these offences. If the Gardaí
reasonably suspect that you have fireworks for sale or supply without a
licence they may:

  * Request your name and address 
  * Request you to go to the Garda station to verify your name and address (if they are not satisfied your details are correct) 
  * Search you without a warrant and detain you for the time required to carry out the search 
  * Enter and search any vehicle, vessel or aircraft without a warrant, if they suspect that a firework may be found there 
  * Seize and detain anything connected with fireworks found in the course of the search 

If the Gardaí suspect that you have committed an offence of sale or supply of
fireworks without a licence, they may arrest you without a warrant.

###  If the Gardaí have a search warrant

The warrant allows the Gardaí to enter a premises, by force if necessary, and
it also allows them to seize any evidence that a fireworks offence has been
committed. The Gardaí can demand the name and address of anyone present at the
premises when they are searching it.

Anybody who obstructs the Gardaí during the search under the warrant may be
arrested. If found guilty in court, you may be liable on summary conviction to
a [ class C fine ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-
offences/) or to a prison sentence of up to 6 months, or to both.

###  What can I do if fireworks are being set off in my area?

If you are concerned about fireworks being set off where you live, you can
report it to the Gardaí.

You should phone [ your local Garda station ](https://www.garda.ie/en/Contact-
Us/Station-Directory/) , or you can call the Garda confidential line on 1800
666 111.

##  Labelling of fireworks

All F1 fireworks sold must include the following on the firework or packaging:

  * Instructions for use 
  * Minimum safety distance (if appropriate) 
  * “For outdoor use only” (if appropriate) 
  * Minimum age of person it can be sold to 
  * Name, type of item and category of firework 
  * Name of the manufacturer or importer 
  * The [ CE mark ](https://www.nsai.ie/certification/nsai-certification/ce-marking/)
  * The mass of explosive content (also known as NEQ, or Net Explosive Quantity) 

##  Further information

You can get more [ information and guidance documents about fireworks in
Ireland ](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/Fireworks) on the Department of
Justice website.

You can read [ general guidance on fireworks (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/121355/405ab181-c040-4aa8-bf78-9cd953fb2f5d.pdf#page=null)
published by the Office of the Government Inspector of Fireworks.

###  Department of Justice

94 St. Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 602 8202

**Locall:** 1800 221 227

**Fax:** (01) 661 5461

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/)

**Email:** [ info@justice.ie ](mailto:info@justice.ie)

###  Firearms and Explosives Licensing and Inspections

Department of Justice

94 St. Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland  
D02 HK52

**Tel:** 01 859 2279

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/)

**Email:** [ explosives@justice.ie ](mailto:explosives@justice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 16 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-fireworks/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Fireworks%3A%20the%20law&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-fireworks/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-fireworks/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Fireworks%3A%20the%20law&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-fireworks/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001–2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

1816.911

  * [ _The law on defamation in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/law-on-defamation/)

You can take legal action against a person or corporation who makes a
‘defamatory statement’ to another person.

1791.627

  * [ _Seat belts and the law_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-safety/seatbelts-when-motoring-in-ireland/)

There is a legal obligation in Ireland to be restrained when motoring and this
applies to drivers and passengers. Overview of the law currently in place
regarding the wearing of seatbelts and child restraints in motor vehicles.

1771.594

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

