**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Legal aid and
advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/) > Garda Station Legal Advice
Revised Scheme

#  Garda Station Legal Advice Revised Scheme

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

Under the Garda Station Legal Advice Revised Scheme, free legal advice can be
provided to people detained under certain legislation in Garda stations,
providing they satisfy a means test.

##  Rules

The Garda Station Legal Advice Revised Scheme applies to those detained in a
Garda station under investigation for certain offences. You must be legally
entitled to consult a solicitor and you must be unable to pay for the
consultation yourself.

The scheme applies if you are detained under:

  * Offences under Section 30 of the [ Offences Against the State Act 1939 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1939/act/13/enacted/en/html) as amended 
  * Offences under Section 4 of the [ Criminal Justice Act 1984 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1984/act/22/enacted/en/html) as amended 
  * Offences under Section 2 of the [ Criminal Justice (Drug Trafficking) Act 1996 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1996/act/29/enacted/en/html) as amended 
  * Offences under Section 50 of the [ Criminal Justice Act 2007 ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2007/act/29/enacted/en/html) as amended 

Those detained under Sections 16 and 17 of the [ Criminal Procedures Act 2010
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2010/act/27/enacted/en/html) or Section
42 of the [ Criminal Justice Act 1999
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1999/act/10/enacted/en/html) can also
apply for legal advice under the scheme as if detained under Section 4 of the
Criminal Justice Act 1984.

####  Under the scheme, fees are paid to a solicitor for:

  * Telephone and in-station consultations 
  * Attendance of the solicitor at a formal interview between the Gardaí and the detainee 
  * Attendance of the solicitor at an identity parade 

The number of consultations the scheme will cover you for depends on the
legislation you are detained under.

###  Extension hearings

If the Gardaí apply to extend the time limit for holding a suspect, the scheme
also covers payments to a solicitor who attends an extension hearing held in
the [ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) .

###  Means Test

When you apply for the scheme, you will have to complete a statement of means.
The scheme is confined to those who are in receipt of social welfare payments
and those whose annual gross earnings are less than €20,316.

##  How to apply

If you are detained in a Garda station and want to apply for the scheme you
should complete [ form GLAS 2 (pdf) ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/lawyers-
and-experts/legal-professionals-in-criminal-legal-aid-ad-hoc-cases/garda-
station-legal-advice-revised-scheme/glas2-form.pdf) . The form is available
from:

  * Garda stations 
  * Your solicitor 
  * The Criminal Legal Aid Section of the Legal Aid Board 

Your solicitor submits his/her claim for fees at the end of the detention
period to the Legal Aid Board.

Further information on the scheme is available on the [ Legal Aid Board's
website
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Garda_Station_Legal_Advice_Scheme)
.

_**Page edited:** 21 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/garda-station-legal-advice-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Garda%20Station%20Legal%20Advice%20Revised%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/garda-station-legal-advice-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/garda-station-legal-advice-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Garda%20Station%20Legal%20Advice%20Revised%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/garda-station-legal-advice-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Civil legal aid and legal advice_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/)

An explanation of civil legal aid and legal advice and the eligibility
criteria to be able to avail of it.

2339.384

  * [ _Free Legal Advice Centres (FLAC)_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/free-legal-advice-centre/)

FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) is an independent voluntary organisation that
offers free basic legal information and advice.

2241.7754

  * [ _Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/)

Information about Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

1395.7515

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

