**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Victims of
crime ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/) > Compensation for victims of crime

#  Compensation for victims of crime

  * Am I entitled to compensation? 
  * Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme 
  * How much compensation will I get? 
  * Compensation scheme for prison officers 
  * Compensation by court order 
  * What if I am a victim of crime abroad? 
  * Support services for victims of crime 
  * How do I apply for compensation? 
  * Where to apply 

##  Am I entitled to compensation?

As a victim of crime, you may be entitled to compensation under the [ Scheme
of Compensation for Personal Injuries Criminally Inflicted
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/90be4-terms-and-conditions-of-the-
criminal-injuries-compensation-scheme/) (also known as “the Criminal Injuries
Compensation Scheme”).

The Scheme also provides for the dependents of a victim of a fatal criminal
injury to receive compensation. The Scheme is funded by the [ Department of
Justice ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-justice/) and
administered by the [ Criminal Injuries Compensation Tribunal
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/0bff8-criminal-injuries-compensation-
scheme/) .

This page outlines the process of claiming compensation under the Criminal
Injuries Compensation Scheme. You can also seek compensation through the
courts. See ‘Compensation by court order’ below.

##  Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme

###  What does the Scheme cover?

The Scheme pays compensation for expenses and losses suffered in the following
2 circumstances:

  1. As a direct result of a violent crime, or 
  2. While helping (or trying to help) to prevent a crime or save a human life 

###  Who can claim compensation?

The Tribunal will consider claims for compensation under the Scheme from:

  * The injured person (the victim) 
  * Persons claiming on behalf of the victim in circumstances where they are responsible for the victim’s maintenance and they have experienced material losses as a result of the victim’s injuries 
  * Dependents of the victim in fatal cases where the victim has died 

###  Time limits for making an application

Applications for compensation should be made as soon as possible and must be
made in writing within 3 months from the date of the incident causing the
injury. However, the Tribunal can accept late applications up to a maximum of
2 years following the incident in [ exceptional circumstances
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/6edbc-criminal-injuries-compensation-
scheme-your-questions-answered/#when-an-application-must-be-made-and-whether-
there-is-a-time-limit) .

####  **If you were injured between 30 June 2005 and 20 April 2021**

From 31 January 2024 until 30 January 2025, you can submit a late application
if you were criminally injured between 30 June 2005 and 20 April 2021. The
Tribunal can accept such applications if there are [ exceptional circumstances
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/6edbc-criminal-injuries-compensation-
scheme-your-questions-answered/#when-an-application-must-be-made-and-whether-
there-is-a-time-limit) that justify a late application. If you are making a
late application, you must insert reasons on the application form to explain
the delay.

From 30 January 2025, applications relating to incidents which took place
between 30 June 2005 and 20 April 2021 will no longer be accepted.

####  **Reporting the crime**

You are required to [ report the crime ](/en/justice/law-
enforcement/reporting-a-crime/) without delay to [ An Garda Síochána (the
Irish police force) ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-national-
police-force/) . In any case where the crime is alleged to have been carried
out by a member of An Garda Síochána, you are required to report details of
the incident to the [ Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission (GSOC)
](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-ombudsman-commission/) . You also
must co-operate fully with the investigation into the criminal incident by the
relevant authorities.

###  Consideration of your claim

Under the Scheme, a decision on your claim is made, in the first instance, by
the Tribunal based on the submitted documents and does not require you to
attend a hearing. The procedure for considering your claim varies depending on
the amount of money involved.

For cases worth:

  * Less than €3,000, a decision may be made by a duly authorised officer of the Tribunal. The Tribunal may appoint one of their staff members as a duly authorised officer. 
  * More than €3,000, the application must be submitted for decision to a Tribunal Member. A Tribunal Member is a qualified barrister or solicitor appointed by the Minister for Justice to undertake duties relating to the Tribunal on a part-time basis. 
  * Less than €75,000, the application will be decided by a single Tribunal Member. 
  * More than €75,000, the application will be decided collectively by three Tribunal Members. 

You are notified by the secretariat of the decision when it is made available.
You can accept or appeal the decision.

Decisions of the Tribunal, redacted to remove personal data, may be made [
publicly available ](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/ae2c6-decisions-by-the-
criminal-injuries-compensation-tribunal/) .

###  Appealing the decision of the Tribunal

In the event you appeal the Tribunal’s original decision, you will be invited
to an appeal hearing with a panel of 3 Tribunal members. The panel cannot
include a Tribunal member who made the original decision.

The application is considered afresh without reference to the original
decision. The panel hear the case orally and make a final decision on the
claim.

The appeal hearing will be held in private and in an informal manner so legal
representation is not required. The Scheme makes no provision for awarding
legal costs; therefore, the Tribunal cannot make any award in respect of costs
you incur in soliciting legal representation.

The hearing may be conducted remotely by teleconference or web-based video
conference. However, it may, in certain circumstances, be held onsite.

The decision of the Tribunal Appeal Hearing is considered to be final and
cannot be appealed.

###  Exceptions to the scheme

No compensation will be paid:

  * If the loss you suffer is less than €500 
  * If your injury is the result of a traffic offence, unless the Tribunal decides that there was a deliberate attempt to run you down 
  * If you do not give reasonable assistance to the Tribunal and the Gardaí (or GSOC, where relevant) 

There are various other exceptions in the Scheme ( [ paragraphs 9-15
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/90be4-terms-and-conditions-of-the-
criminal-injuries-compensation-scheme/) ) where an award may be reduced or no
award made.

##  How much compensation will I get?

The Scheme only covers financial losses, such as lost earnings and vouched
(proven by original receipts) out-of-pocket expenses and bills. It does not
compensate you for general damages, such as pain and suffering.

The Scheme covers personal injury only and makes no provision for compensation
in respect of stolen or damaged property, even if such property was stolen or
damaged at the same time and by the same offender who caused or inflicted the
injury which is the subject of your claim.

When deciding the amount of the award involving loss of earnings, the Tribunal
will consider any social welfare payments, agriculture payments, salary or
wages you received while on sick leave from work. The Tribunal will also take
into account any compensation paid to you by or on behalf of the offender.

The Tribunal may reduce the amount of compensation, or give no compensation at
all, if it decides that you were partly or wholly to blame for the incident;
for example, if you provoked the incident. It may also reduce the amount of
compensation because of your behaviour, character or way of life. If you have
a criminal record, it can be taken into account.

The amount of compensation depends on the type and circumstances of the case
including, for example, as follows:

###  1\. Personal injuries with short-term effects

If you sustained personal injuries with short-term effects, you may be
compensated for:

  * Out-of-pocket expenses you have incurred as a result of the incident (provided you can provide original receipts) 
  * Actual loss of earnings (because you had to take time off work) 
  * Actual medical expenses (including dental and optical expenses) 
  * Reasonable travel expenses related to the injuries incurred, such as going to and from the doctor (provided you can provide original receipts) 

###  2\. Personal injuries with long-term effects

In cases where longer term injuries have been experienced, you can, in
addition to the type of compensation listed at 1 above, also be paid for your:

  * Estimated future loss of earnings (if your injury restricts or fully prevents your future working) 
  * Estimated future medical expenses 
  * Estimated future expenses as a result of any disability suffered (such as future care or special equipment required) 
  * Estimated future loss of earning potential 

Typically, the Tribunal will only make such awards on provision of various
specialist reports, including an actuarial assessment.

###  3\. Death of the victim due to criminal injury

Dependents can be paid for the:

  * Actual loss of earnings and expenses that may have been incurred before the death 
  * Future loss of support or maintenance for anyone who was dependent on the victim 
  * Costs of funeral and burial expenses 

In fatal cases, the Scheme also provides that an award (the maximum amount of
which cannot currently exceed €35,000) may be made under the Civil Liability
Act, 1961 in respect of mental distress experienced by dependents.

To avail of such compensation, applicants must declare all dependents as
defined in the 1961 Act and, for any dependent who wishes to waive their
entitlement to compensation, provide either a signed waiver (for those over
18) or an original birth certificate. The Tribunal will consider all
dependents in determining how to allocate the €35,000.

###  4\. Death of the victim not due to the criminal injury

If the victim died of causes unrelated to the criminal injury, compensation
will not be provided by the Tribunal in respect of loss of earnings, expenses
and liabilities incurred before the death unless the Tribunal considers that
this would otherwise cause hardship to the victim’s dependents.

###  5\. Stolen or damaged property

The Scheme does not compensate for stolen or damaged property.

###  How is compensation paid?

Usually, it is paid in a single payment. However, there are exceptions:

  * The Tribunal may make an initial payment, typically in respect of vouched medical expenses, and postpone the final award until it becomes clearer what the long-term effect of an injury is likely to be. 
  * If you are under 18 years old, the Tribunal may invest the money until you become an adult. 
  * If you are no longer able to manage your affairs, the Tribunal may have the money placed in a trust for your benefit. 

##  Compensation scheme for prison officers

The Criminal Injuries Compensation Tribunal administers a separate
compensation scheme for prison officers who are injured or die due to a
violent crime. Application forms under this Scheme are available from the
offices of the Tribunal (see ‘Where to apply’ below for contact details).

##  Compensation by court order

In some criminal cases, the court may decide that an offender must pay
compensation to you.

This may be one of several conditions that the court has imposed on the
offender so that they can avoid a [ prison sentence ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sentence/) . The court may ask the [ Probation Service
](/en/justice/probation-and-welfare-services/probation-service/) to supervise
the payment of the compensation.

Alternatively, [ you may bring a civil case ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-
and-appealing-a-civil-case/) against the offender seeking a court order for
damages for any injury and loss caused.

You can seek compensation under both court order and by the Criminal Injuries
Compensation Scheme. However, you cannot be doubly compensated for any losses
you have suffered. If an application is made for a court order, the processing
of any application under the Scheme may be suspended until the outcome of the
court proceedings is known.

##  What if I am a victim of crime abroad?

###  Compensation for victims of crime in other EU member states

If you are injured as a result of a crime while visiting another EU member
state, you may be entitled for compensation in the state where the incident
took place.

The European Commission [ provides an online portal
](https://e-justice.europa.eu/content_compensation-67-en.do) , which sets out
the compensation schemes available in EU member states. You should contact the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Tribunal for help with making your claim for
compensation (see ‘Where to apply’ below for contact details).

The Tribunal can help you get the application form that you need to make your
claim. It can also translate the form and your answers if the state you are
applying to does not accept applications in English. If you wish, the Tribunal
will also receive correspondence about your claim from the other member state
and pass it on to you.

You can read more regarding [ the handling of cross-border compensation claims
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/eca9f-access-to-compensation-in-cross-
border-cases/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b24806-access-to-
compensation-in-cross-border-cases/) on the Department of Justice website.

###  Victim of crime outside the EU

If you are a victim of crime while visiting a country outside of the EU, you
should contact a local [ Irish embassy or consulate for support ](/en/moving-
country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/diplomatic-supports/) . Depending on the
[ nature of the crime ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-
travel/assistance-abroad/victim-of-crime/) , you should also contact the local
police. A local Irish embassy or consulate can assist you in dealing with the
local police if necessary.

If you have since returned to Ireland, you can report the crime to An Garda
Síochána who will [ forward ](https://www.garda.ie/en/victim-
services/reporting-a-crime-faqs/) this to the appropriate police service.

The Department of Foreign Affairs has [ further information on the role of
embassies and consulates ](https://www.victimscharter.ie/support-
reporting/department-of-foreign-affairs-and-trade/#consular) in supporting
victims of crime abroad.

##  Support services for victims of crime

Victims of crime can get support from the [ Crime Victims Helpline
](https://crimevictimshelpline.ie/) . There are also other [ support services
for victims of crime ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/support-services-for-
victims-of-crime/) available that can offer particular support depending on
the nature of the crime.

You can learn more about your rights and entitlements as a victim of crime on
the [ Victims Charter website ](https://www.victimscharter.ie/) .

##  How do I apply for compensation?

You can download the [ Fatal Injury Application Form
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/30dc8-criminal-injuries-compensation-scheme/)
or the [ Non-Fatal Application Form
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/30dc8-criminal-injuries-compensation-scheme/)
from the Tribunal's website. You can also contact the offices of the Tribunal
to request an application form in the post.

You should fill out the application form and return it to the Tribunal.
Receipts for expenses must be submitted when advised by the Tribunal
secretariat to do so.

Information on the [ compensation scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/90be4-terms-and-conditions-of-the-
criminal-injuries-compensation-scheme/) is available in Section 14 of the [
Victims Charter (pdf) ](https://www.victimscharter.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2024/05/Victims-Charter.pdf) .

##  Where to apply

###  Criminal Injuries Compensation Tribunal

Department of Justice

Bishop's Square  
Redmond's Hill  
Dublin 2  
D02 TD99

**Tel:** (01) 4790290

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/0bff8-criminal-injuries-
compensation-scheme/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/0bff8-criminal-
injuries-compensation-scheme/)

**Email:** [ criminalinjuries@justice.ie ](mailto:criminalinjuries@justice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/compensation-for-victims-of-crime/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Compensation%20for%20victims%20of%20crime&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/compensation-for-victims-of-crime/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/compensation-for-victims-of-crime/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Compensation%20for%20victims%20of%20crime&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/victims-
of-crime/compensation-for-victims-of-crime/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Support services for victims of crime_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/support-services-for-victims-of-crime/)

An outline of services available to support victims of crime.

2136.1636

  * [ _Victims of crime and the law_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/victims-and-the-law/)

Legislation that has been implemented to protect and support victims of crime.

1933.8357

  * [ _Your rights as a victim of crime_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/your-rights-as-a-victim-of-crime/)

Outlines the main rights of a person who has been the victim of a crime.

1618.3251

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

