**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Injuries Resolution Board

#  Injuries Resolution Board

  * The Injuries Resolution Board 
  * How to apply to the Injuries Resolution Board 
  * How are claims assessed? 
  * Resolving a claim through mediation 
  * Compensation amounts 
  * Taking a case to court 
  * Fees for Injuries Resolution Board 
  * Further information 

##  The Injuries Resolution Board

The Injuries Resolution Board, previously known as the Personal Injuries
Assessment Board (PIAB), is an independent statutory body that deals with
personal injury claims. All personal injury claims in Ireland, except for
medical negligence claims, must be submitted to the Injuries Resolution Board.

The Injuries Resolution Board provides an independent assessment of personal
injury claims for compensation following road traffic, workplace or public
liability accidents.

If the person you hold responsible for your injury (the respondent) does not
want the Injuries Resolution Board to assess your claim for compensation, you
can take your claim to court.

Most claims are assessed in 9 months from when the respondent agreed for the
claim to be assessed by the Injuries Resolution Board.

##  How to apply to the Injuries Resolution Board

You should notify the person you are claiming against (the respondent) within
one month of the accident. If you don’t do this, it could affect your claim
for legal costs if the case goes to court.

You can submit your personal injury compensation claim:

  * On the Injuries Resolution Board website using the [ online application form ](https://form.piab.ie/Pages/Checklist.aspx)
  * By emailing an [ application form (pdf) ](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/forms-guides/application-form.pdf) to [ post@injuries.ie ](mailto:post@injuries.ie)
  * By posting an application form to P.O. BOX 8, Clonakilty, Cork, Ireland, P85 YH98 

###  **Completing the application form**

You must complete an [ Injuries Resolution Board Application Form (pdf)
](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/forms-guides/application-form.pdf) to make a
claim by post or email.

For the Injuries Resolution Board to proceed with your claim, your application
must include:

  * Your full name, date of birth and home address 
  * Your contact number, if you have one (if you do not have one, you can state this on the form) 
  * Your [ Personal Public Service (PPS) number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) , or, if you were never issued a PPS number, a copy of a valid ID, such as a driver’s license, passport, national ID card, or other proof of your right to reside in Ireland 
  * Whether you are making a road traffic, workplace or public liability claim 
  * Details of the accident or incident (the date and time it occurred, and how and where it happened) 
  * A description of your injuries and how they affected you 
  * A medical report completed by your treating doctor 
  * Name and address for the respondent 
  * Whether you consent to the claim being dealt with by mediation (employer liability claims only, see ‘Resolving a claim through mediation’ below) 
  * Payment (see ‘Fees for Injuries Resolution Board’ below) 

You should also provide any other documents that support your claim, such as
copies of receipts for any losses or expenses you suffered because of the
accident.

You can read the [ Injuries Resolution Board’s Guidance Notes (pdf)
](https://www.piab.ie/eng/forms-guides/piab-application-guidance-notes-
from-4th-september-2023-.pdf) for further information on how to complete the
application form. You can also read the [ Injuries Resolution Board’s Guidance
on Medical Reports (pdf) ](https://www.piab.ie/eng/forms-guides/piab-guidance-
on-medical-reports.pdf) .

###  **Making a claim on behalf of someone else**

You can make a claim on behalf of someone else if they:

  * Are under 18 
  * Are of unsound mind 
  * Were fatally injured in the accident or incident 

You will need to provide your own details and details of your relationship
with the person you are claiming on behalf of.

You must use a [ Fatal Accident Application Form (pdf)
](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/forms-guides/fatal-accident-application-
form1.pdf) when claiming for someone who was fatally injured.

###  **Do I need a solicitor to make a claim?**

You don’t need to use a [ solicitor
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) to make
a claim, but you can use one if you want to. You will need to provide their
details in the application form.

###  **Offences**

It is an offence to give false information in your application. The Injuries
Resolution Board can disclose this information to [ the Gardaí
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-
siochana-national-police-force/) .

You can find more information about [ making a claim
](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/the-claims-process/making-a-claim/) on the
Injuries Resolution Board’s website.

##  How are claims assessed?

When assessing claims and the damages which may be due to you, the Injuries
Resolution Board considers:

  * The medical report from your doctor 
  * A report from an independent doctor appointed by the Injuries Resolution Board, if necessary 
  * The injuries you sustained and your circumstances 

The Injuries Resolution Board is not required to assess certain claims and, in
those cases, it will grant you an authorisation to bring legal proceedings.
The Injuries Resolution Board previously did not make assessments in claims
for psychological injuries, but it now does.

You can read the [ Injuries Resolution Board’s FAQs about making a personal
injury claim ](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/help-support/faqs/#accordion_4375)
.

###  **Time limits for making an application**

Under the [ Civil Liabilities and Courts Act 2004
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2004/en/act/pub/0031/index.html) , the time
limit for claims for compensation is 2 years from the date of the accident.

It is very important that you notify the person you hold responsible for your
injury (the respondent) within one month of the accident. You should notify
them in writing (by registered post) detailing what they have done. This gives
the person, company or organisation a chance to investigate your claim.

If you do not inform the other person, it may affect your case later if you go
to court, and you may not be able to recover your costs.

###  **Respondent disagrees with** **Injuries Resolution Board assessing
case**

When the Injuries Resolution Board receives your claim, it will give you an
application number. It will then inform the respondent about your claim. The
respondent has 90 days to agree to let the Injuries Resolution Board assess
your claim.

If the respondent agrees to this, they must pay a fee (see ‘Fees for Injuries
Resolution Board’ below).

If the respondent does not agree to this, the Injuries Resolution Board will
issue you with an _Authorisation_ . This is a legal document that allows you
to take your claim through the courts if you wish.

###  **Motor accident with uninsured or unknown driver**

If your claim is against a driver who was not insured, or who left the scene
without giving their details, you should contact the [ Motor Insurers Bureau
of Ireland (MIBI) ](https://www.mibi.ie/) before you make your claim to the
Injuries Resolution Board.

You can read more about [ making a claim ](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/the-
claims-process/making-a-claim/) and [ responding to a claim
](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/the-claims-process/responding-to-a-claim/) on
the Injuries Resolution Board’s website.

##  Resolving a claim through mediation

The Injuries Resolution Board offers a free mediation service for workplace
injury and public liability claims. Mediation services will include road
traffic claims later in 2024.

A mediator is an impartial, trained professional who will work with you and
the respondent to try find an agreement that both parties accept. Mediation is
free of charge and voluntary. You can leave the process at any time.

You can read more about [ mediation at the Injuries Resolution Board
](https://www.injuries.ie/eng/mediation/) .

####  How to apply for mediation

You can consent to mediation on the application form. If both you and the
respondent consent to mediation, your claim will be assigned to a mediator.
This happens at the start of the process.

####  What happens after mediation?

If you come to an agreement, the mediator will give you and the respondent a
written agreement to sign, followed by a 10-day cooling off period. If both
parties are still happy after the 10-day period, the Injuries Resolution Board
will issue a legally binding _Order to Pay_ (see 'Compensation amounts'
below).

If no agreement is reached, you can have your claim assessed by the Board if
the respondent consents. If they don’t consent to the assessment, you can take
the case to court (see 'Taking a case to court' below).

####  **Confidentiality of mediation**

All information shared during the mediation process is confidential. This
means it cannot be shared during a later assessment or in any court
proceedings, even if no agreement is reached.

##  Compensation amounts

The guideline amounts for compensation for particular injuries are set out in
the [ Injuries Guidelines (pdf)
](https://judicialcouncil.ie/assets/uploads/documents/Personal%20Injuries%20Guidelines.pdf)
. The Injuries Resolution Board can depart from the Injuries Guidelines but
must explain its reasons for doing so.

###  **Accepting or rejecting the compensation award**

You and the respondent will both receive a Notice of Assessment which sets out
the compensation the Injuries Resolution Board has assessed for the injury.

####  **Claimant accepts or rejects the award**

When the Injuries Resolution Board makes its assessment, you have 28 days to
decide whether to accept or reject the award.

If you accept it, you must acknowledge this in writing to the Injuries
Resolution Board.

If you do not reply within 28 days, it is taken that you have **rejected** the
assessment.

####  **Respondent accepts or rejects the assessment**

The respondent has 21 days to accept or reject the assessment.

If the respondent does not reply within this time limit, it is taken that they
have **accepted** the assessment.

####  **Both parties accept the assessment**

If both parties accept the assessment, the Injuries Resolution Board will
issue an _Order to Pay_ to the respondent. This means that the respondent will
pay you the amount awarded to settle the claim.

####  **Either party rejects the assessment**

If either you or the respondent rejects the assessment, the Injuries
Resolution Board will issue you with an _Authorisation_ allowing you to take
your claim to court.

If the court awards you a lower amount than the Injuries Resolution Board did,
you will generally have to pay the respondent’s legal costs as well as your
own (see ‘Taking a case to court’ below).

###  **Social welfare recovery**

Under the [ Recovery of Certain Benefits and Assistance Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/9f50f5-recovery-of-benefits-assistance-rba-
scheme/) , the Department of Social Protection can recover the value of
certain illness-related social welfare payments from compensation awards. The
benefits are recovered from the compensator and not from the injured person.

##  Taking a case to court

You can [ take your case to court ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-
appealing-a-civil-case/) if:

  * The respondent does not agree with the Injuries Resolution Board assessing the claim 
  * The respondent does not agree with the amount of compensation 
  * You do not agree with the amount of compensation 
  * The respondent fails to pay the agreed amount of compensation 

The Injuries Resolution Board gives you an _Authorisation_ to take a case to
court. You should get legal advice before taking a case to court.

###  Legal costs

In civil cases, the court usually awards [ costs
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-law/legal-fees-and-
costs-for-civil-cases/) to the person who wins the case. This means that if
your case is successful, the court will order the respondent to pay your legal
fees. There are some exceptions to this in personal injuries cases.

Even if you win, you will usually still pay the respondent’s costs if:

  * You went to court because you did not agree with the amount of compensation that the Board awarded, and 
  * The respondent did agree with the amount, and 
  * The court awards less than that amount 

You may also be ordered to pay costs if you didn’t comply with requests from
the Injuries Resolution Board.

For example, if you did not:

  * Provide information that the Injuries Resolution Board requested, or 
  * Attend a medical examination arranged by the Board 

If you did not inform the respondent of your intention to take a personal
injuries case within one month of the accident, this could also affect your
claim for legal costs.

##  Fees for Injuries Resolution Board

The fee to make an application to the Injuries Resolution Board for personal
injury compensation is:

  * €45 for applications submitted using the [ online application form ](https://form.piab.ie/Pages/Checklist.aspx)
  * €90 for claim forms submitted by post or email 

If a claim has been made against you and you agree to allow the Board to
assess it, you must pay a fee of €1,050.

###  **How to pay**

If you are submitting the claim through the online application form, you can
pay by debit or credit card.

If you are submitting the claim by post or email, you can pay by:

  * Cheque 
  * Postal order 
  * Electronic funds transfer (Injuries Resolution Board will provide IBAN/BIC account details upon request) 

##  Further information

You can read more about how to make a claim in the [ Injuries Resolution
Board’s Claimant Guide (pdf) ](https://www.piab.ie/eng/the-claims-
process/piab_claimant_guide.pdf) .

If you have any further queries about making a claim to the Injuries
Resolution Board or about the application process, contact the Injuries
Resolution Board:

###  Injuries Resolution Board

P.O. Box 8  
Clonakilty  
Cork  
Ireland  
P85 YH98

**Tel:** 0818 829 121

**Fax:** 0818 829 122

**Homepage:** [ https://www.injuries.ie ](https://www.injuries.ie)

**Email:** [ enquiries@injuries.ie ](mailto:enquiries@injuries.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/injuries-resolution-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Injuries%20Resolution%20Board&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/injuries-resolution-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/injuries-resolution-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Injuries%20Resolution%20Board&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/injuries-resolution-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/)

Information about Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

1632.9236

  * [ _How to access your personal data under the GDPR_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document explains how to access your personal data under data protection
laws and the GDPR.

1382.3296

  * [ _Compensation for overbooked, cancelled and delayed flights in the EU_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/compensation-for-overbooked-and-delayed-flights/)

Air passengers have specific consumer rights. Find out what happens if you are
denied access to an overbooked scheduled flight or your flight is cancelled or
delayed.

1332.6263

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

