**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Arrests
](/en/justice/arrests/) > Powers of search

#  Powers of search

  * Introduction 
  * Personal searches 
  * Search warrants 
  * Search on arrest 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

When the Gardaí are conducting their investigation of a crime, they may need
to search certain premises to look for evidence. Generally, the gardaí must
obtain a search warrant before they may search your premises or home without
your consent.

##  Personal searches

A Garda can ask you to stop at any time. In certain circumstances, such as
when you are driving, you must stop if asked to by a garda. A Garda can search
you, without your consent, if the Garda has reasonable suspicion that you have
committed certain offences. This includes people under the age of 18. The
Garda should tell you why you are being searched.

##  Search warrants

A search warrant is a written order giving a person authority to enter a
premises and search for and seize property. They may be issued to Gardaí or to
other authorised people for example, health inspectors, health and safety
inspectors, social welfare officers, TV licence inspectors. The circumstances
in which search warrants may be issued vary from one piece of legislation to
another.

Generally, search warrants are issued by District Court Judges or peace
commissioners when a Garda makes a statement on oath that they know or has
reasonable cause for believing or suspecting that a crime has been or is being
committed.

In general, reasonable force may be used to execute a search warrant.

[ Items of evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/evidence-introduction/) obtained as
a result of a legal and valid search may be kept and used as evidence in any
criminal proceedings against you.

Search warrants must be executed within the time limits set out in them. If
they are not executed within the time limits, then any information obtained as
a result of the search may not be admitted in evidence in a trial.

###  Necessity for a search warrant

A search warrant is often necessary before a Garda may search a premises or
any person present. However, certain legislation entitles the Gardai to enter
premises without a warrant, for example, the Intoxicating Liquor Acts, the
Public Dance Halls Act, and the Health Acts.

If a Garda gets a search warrant relating to certain offences he/she may
search the premises named and any person on the premises. Examples of this are
a search warrant issued under the [ Offences Against the State Act 1939
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1939/en/act/pub/0013/index.html) , or the [
Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud) Offences Act 2001
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2001/en/act/pub/0050/index.html) . Under the
[ Criminal Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1979
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0004/index.html) , as amended
by [ Section 6 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0026/sec0006.html#sec6) , the
Gardaí can obtain a warrant in relation to an [ arrestable offence
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-
criminal-cases/) .

Other legislation, for example, the Dublin Police Act, the Misuse of Drugs
Act, the Criminal Law Act and the Animal Remedies Act, entitles police
officers to search you and/or your vehicle without a warrant.

If one of these statutes is being invoked in order to search you without a
search warrant, you are entitled to told about it.

Evidence obtained on foot of an invalid search warrant or obtained without a
warrant may be excluded by the trial judge and excluded particularly if the
search involved a deliberate and conscious breach of your constitutional
rights.

In extraordinary excusing circumstances, the court may allow evidence obtained
as a result of a deliberate and conscious breach of the Constitution. However,
these circumstances are very rare, for example, a case involving an urgent
need to rescue a victim in danger.

##  Search on arrest

When you are [ arrested ](/en/justice/arrests/arrests/) , the Gardai may take
goods in your possession if they believe that it is necessary to do so and if
the goods are evidence in support of a criminal charge. The Gardai may search
you [ after your arrest ](/en/justice/arrests/treatment-in-custody/) without a
search warrant and the goods seized may be kept and used as evidence at your
trial.

##  Further information

More information on Garda search powers is available in the Irish Council for
Civil Liberties (ICCL) Know Your Rights publication [ Criminal Justice and
Garda Powers ](https://www.iccl.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/ICCL_KYR_Justice_2014_LR.pdf) .

_**Page edited:** 1 February 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/powers-
of-search/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Powers%20of%20search&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/powers-
of-search/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/powers-
of-search/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Powers%20of%20search&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/powers-
of-search/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Customs officers - powers of search_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/examination-of-travellers-baggage-by-customs-and-excise-officers/)

This page includes the powers of Customs and Excise officers to carry out
searches of travellers to prevent the importation of prohibited goods or goods
that have not been declared to Customs.

2004.2444

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1355.9865

  * [ _Agency agreements, trusts, and ordinary powers of attorney_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-incapacity/)

If you need someone to act on your behalf, this page explains some of the
arrangements available.

1240.0939

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

