**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Law
enforcement ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/) > Restriction on movement orders

#  Restriction on movement orders

  * Introduction 
  * How does a restriction on movement order work? 
  * Changing a restriction order after it's made 
  * Can I have more than one restriction on movement order placed on me? 
  * What happens if I fail to obey a restriction order? 
  * What offences can result in a restriction of movement order? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you are convicted of certain minor offences, the courts can restrict your
movements instead of sending you to prison.

These restrictions are known as _restriction on movement_ _orders_ under [
Section 101 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0026/sec0101.html#sec101) .

A restriction on movement order can only be applied if you:

  * Are aged 18 years or over, and 
  * Have been convicted by the court and could be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 3 months or more. 

The court cannot impose a restriction on movement order for a period longer
than 6 months.

##  How does a restriction on movement order work?

The order can restrict your movements as the court considers appropriate and
may include a curfew element.

###  **Staying in a particular place**

If you are under a curfew, you must be in a particular place for a particular
period. For example, you may have to be at your home between the hours of 8pm
and 8am.

An order cannot require you to remain in a place or places for more than 12
hours in a day.

###  **Staying away from a particular place**

Similarly, the order can forbid you from being in a particular place for a
particular period. For example, you may have to stay away from a certain named
street or premises between 8pm and 8am.

Before making a restriction order, the court must explain to you:

  * What the order means 
  * What may happen if you do not comply with the restriction order 
  * That the court can vary the order if an application is made 

The court arranges for a copy of the restriction on movement order to be sent
to the Garda station for the area where the offender lives.

##  Changing a restriction order after it's made

Yes. A court may vary an order on the written application of the following
people:

  * The offender 
  * The owner of the premises specified in the order 
  * An adult normally living at the premises specified in the order 
  * A member of the Garda Síochána 

The court may vary the order by changing the:

  * Location to another place, or 
  * Length of time for the order will last (for example changing the order from 3 months to 6 months) 
  * Times specified in the order (for example, changing it from 8pm to 8am to 10pm to 8am). 

##  Can I have more than one restriction on movement order placed on me?

Yes, you can. However, if more than one restriction order is running, the
period of time that you must stay at a place or places cannot be more than 6
months.

Where restriction orders are imposed for two or more offences, they may be:

  * Concurrent – meaning they run at the same time, or 
  * Consecutive – meaning the second order will only begin when the first order finishes. 

##  What happens if I fail to obey a restriction order?

Because the Gardaí in your area get a copy of your order from the court, they
can monitor your compliance with it.

If the Gardai believe that you breached the order, they can go back to the
court and let the court know. If the court considers that you have breached
the order the court can do any of the following:

  * Direct you to comply with the order 
  * Cancel the order and impose another restriction on movement order on you 
  * Cancel the order and deal with your case in any other way it could have been dealt with before the order was made 

So, if you fail to obey the restriction of movement order, the court can
impose the punishment it would have done if it didn’t make the restriction of
movement order, including sending you to prison.

##  What offences can result in a restriction of movement order?

The following offences under the [ Criminal Justice (Public Order) Act 1994
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/front/revised/en/html) and
the [ Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1997/act/26/revised/en/html) can result
in restriction on movement orders:

###  Criminal Justice (Public Order) Act 1994

  * [ Section 6: (threatening, abusive or insulting behaviour in a public place) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/6/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 8: (failure to comply with direction of a Garda) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/8/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 11: (entering building, etc, with intent to commit an offence) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/11/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 13: (trespassing on a building or surrounding area in manner likely to cause fear) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/13/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 16: (affray - use of violence or violent threats between two or more people which could cause someone else present to fear for their safety) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/16/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 19: (assaulting or obstructing a medical professional at a hospital or a peace officer, such as a Garda, prison officer or member of the Defence Forces) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/2/section/19/revised/en/html)

###  Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act, 1997

  * [ Section 2: (assault) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1997/act/26/section/2/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 3: (assault causing harm) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1997/act/26/section/3/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 9: (coercion) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1997/act/26/section/9/revised/en/html)
  * [ Section 10: (harassment) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1997/act/26/section/10/revised/en/html)

##  Further information

###  Courts Service

15-24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 F95Y  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://courts.ie/ ](https://courts.ie/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us
](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)

###  Garda Síochána

Phoenix Park  
Dublin 8  
D08 HN3X  
Ireland

**Tel:** 01 6660000; Garda Confidential: 1800 666 111

**Homepage:** [ https://www.garda.ie/en/ ](https://www.garda.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 12 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/restriction-on-movement-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Restriction%20on%20movement%20orders&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/restriction-on-movement-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/restriction-on-movement-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Restriction%20on%20movement%20orders&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/restriction-on-movement-orders/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _UN Convention on the Rights of the Child_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-of-the-child/)

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out the basic human rights
to which every child is entitled. Ireland ratified the Convention on 28
September 1992. Find out more.

1111.5618

  * [ _Freedom of movement in the EU_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-union/freedom-of-movement-in-the-eu/)

Freedom of movement is one of the basic aims of the European Union. This page
explains where this right comes from and how EU citizens can travel freely and
settle anywhere within the EU.

1077.9539

  * [ _COVID Restrictions Support Scheme_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/covid-restrictions-support-scheme/)

This page is a summary of the COVID Restrictions Support Scheme (CRSS).

911.98883

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

