**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > Legal terms
explained

#  Legal terms explained

  * Introduction 
  * A - B 
  * C - D 
  * E - H 
  * I - L 
  * M - Q 
  * R - S 
  * T - Z 

##  Introduction

This page explains some of the terms that are used in legal proceedings.

##  A - B

###  A

####  Acquittal

Where a person is found not guilty of a criminal offence or offences.

####  Alternative dispute resolution (ADR)

All forms of resolving disputes other than by a court. [ Alternative dispute
resolution ](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/alternative-dispute-resolution/)
includes mediation, conciliation and arbitration.

####  _Amicus curiae_

A Latin term meaning “a friend of the court”. A person or entity who is not
directly involved or impacted by court proceedings but who is allowed to
participate by the court on the basis that it may be able to assist the court
in making its decision.

####  Ancillary relief

Orders which are additional to main relief sought. For example, in a [ divorce
](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/divorce-decrees/) or [
judicial separation ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/judicial-separation/) case, the ancillary relief may include orders
for maintenance, custody and access and for pension adjustments

####  Anton Piller order

An order in civil proceedings allowing one party to enter another’s party’s
property to inspect and remove documents and other items. It is normally
granted to prevent an anticipated removal or destruction of possible evidence

####  Appellant

The person who appeals a decision of a lower court or decision-making body.

####  Arbitration

An ADR process where the decision on the legal dispute is made other than by a
court. Either an arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators makes a decision on the
dispute. Each arbitration has its own set of rules.

####  Arraignment

The initial stage in criminal proceedings where the defendant states in court
whether he or she is guilty or not guilty of the offences charged

####  Attestation

Where a witness co-signs a document

####  Aver/Averment

A statement of fact in a legal document, such as an [ affidavit
](/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/)

###  B

####  Bail

Where a person is charged with an offence but released from custody until the
trial. A person is released on [ bail ](/en/justice/arrests/bail-and-surety/)
subject to conditions.

####  Bailiff

An officer of the court who carries out some of the court’s orders

####  Beneficial owner

The person who is ultimately entitled to an asset. In some cases, the person
who legally holds the asset or the rights may do so on behalf of the
beneficial owner. A person who is the beneficial owner may be said to hold a
“beneficial interest”.

####  Beneficiary

The person who is entitled to an asset following the death of a person or
under a trust or an insurance policy. For instance, a person who is to receive
a gift in a will is often called a [ beneficiary ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-
estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

####  Bench warrant

A court order for the arrest of person who has failed to attend court

####  Bequest/bequeath

A [ gift under a will ](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-will/) .
Technically, the gift (bequest) can be any item other than land and buildings.
Where the gift is land or building, it is sometimes called a devise.

####  Burden of proof

Where a person has to prove a particular claim or allegation. It is sometimes
called the onus of proof. In criminal cases, the burden of proof is generally
on the prosecution. In civil cases, the burden of proof is generally on the
plaintiff/complainant.

####  Bye law

A law made by a local authority. For instance, [ local authorities
](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/local-and-regional-
government/functions-of-local-authorities/) often make bye laws in relation to
traffic and parking.

##  C - D

###  C

####  Capacity

The ability of a person to make a binding legal decision or to enter into a
legal agreement. Read about [ legal arrangements for incapacity
](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/legal-arrangements-for-incapacity/) .

####  Care order

A court order placing a child in the care of Tusla (The Child and Family
Agency). It is generally made where it is believed that a child is not
receiving adequate care and attention. Different types of [ care order
](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-
in-care/) can be made such an emergency care order where it is believed that
there is an immediate and serious risk to a child or a special care order
where the child’s own behaviour is placing the child at risk.

####  Codicil

An additional document to an already executed [ will ](/en/death/before-a-
death/making-a-will/) . A person may make a codicil if he or she omits an
asset from the will or wishes to change or further explain his or her
decisions.

####  Collective bargaining

Bargaining carried out on behalf of a number of persons. It most commonly
happens when a union is negotiating with an employer.

####  Commissioner for Oaths

A person authorised by the courts to administer an oath. Affidavits and
statutory declarations can be made before a [ commissioner for oaths
](/en/justice/civil-law/commissioners-for-oaths/) .

####  Common law

The law which is not set out in legislation. Initially, the majority of the
law was made by judges. However, the majority of new law is now in the form of
[ legislation ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-
oireachtas/legislation/) .

####  _Compos mentis_

A latin term meaning “of sound mind”. An adult is compos mentis when he or she
has capacity to make legal decisions.

####  Concurrent sentence

A [ sentence of imprisonment ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/types-
of-sentences/) which runs at the same time as another sentence of imprisonment

####  Consecutive sentence

A sentence of imprisonment which only begins once another sentence of
imprisonment is completed

####  Constructive Dismissal

Where a person resigns from their job, but is left with no alternative because
of the behaviour of their employer. Read more about [ constructive dismissal
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/dismissal/constructive-
dismissal/) .

####  Contempt of court

A failure to comply with a court order or interfering with the administration
of justice by a court, such as interrupting a court hearing.

####  Conveyancing

The legal process where ownership or an interest in land or buildings is
transferred from one person to another. One of the [ steps involved in buying
a home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-
home/) .

####  Creditor

A person you owe a debt to.

###  D

####  Damages

The compensation in money which a person receives if they win a civil case.

####  Data controller

A person who controls the contents and use of personal data. [ Data
controllers have a number of obligations ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/controlling-and-processing-personal-data/) under data protection
law.

####  Data processor

A person who [ processes personal data ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/controlling-and-processing-personal-data/) on behalf of a data
controller.

####  Data subject

A person whose [ personal person data ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/overview-of-general-data-protection-regulation/) is held or
processed by a data controller.

####  Debtor

A person who owes you a debt

####  _De facto_

A Latin term meaning “in fact”. For example, a person who operates as a
director of a company even though not technically appointed a director is
often known as a de facto director.

####  Defamation

Making a wrongful statement which damages a person’s reputation. The [ law on
defamation ](/en/justice/civil-law/law-on-defamation/) is primarily set out in
the Defamation Act 2009.

####  _De jure_

A Latin term meaning “in accordance with law” or “by right”. For example, a
person who is properly appointed as a director of a company can be said to be
a de jure director

####  _De novo_

A Latin term meaning “afresh” or “from the start”. For example, in a de novo
appeal, the case is run as if it were being heard for the first time.

####  Deponent

A person who makes a statement under oath. For example, a person who makes an
[ affidavit ](/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/) is known a deponent

####  Discretionary trust

A trust where the trustees decide which beneficiaries will benefit from the
trust and how much they will get.

####  Domicile

Generally, the country where your permanent home is. Read about [ tax domicile
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-residence-and-
domicile-in-ireland/) .

####  Duress

Actual or threatened violence or unlawful imprisonment. A contract entered
into under duress (including a [ marriage contract ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/nullity-of-
marriage/) ) can be voided by the victim.

##  E - H

###  E

####  Easement

A right to use someone else’s land for a specific purpose, such as a [ right
of way ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/) .

####  Enduring power of attorney

A power of attorney which comes into effect when the person (the donor) loses
mental capacity or becomes unable to deal with their own affairs. The powers
of the “attorney” (the person nominated) will be set out in the instrument
appointing the attorney. [ Enduring powers of attorney ](/en/death/before-a-
death/power-of-attorney/) are regulated by the Powers of Attorney Act 1996.

####  Escrow

When an item is held by a third party until certain conditions are met. For
instance, money may be held in an escrow account by solicitor until a dispute
is finally resolved.

####  _Ex parte_

A Latin term meaning “by or for one party”. An ex parte court application is
one where only one party is present. Often the other side will have a right to
apply to have the ruling set aside.

####  _Ex gratia_

A Latin term meaning “out of grace”. An ex gratia payment is one which is made
where there is no legal obligation to do so.

####  Executor

A person named in a will as being responsible for giving effect to it
including [ distributing the dead person’s estate ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-
estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

###  F

####  Force majeure

An event which cannot be controlled. [ Force majeure leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/types-of-
leave-from-work#lcdc92) is often granted to employees when a close family
member falls serious ill or dies.

###  G

####  _Guardian ad litem_

A person appointed to represent a child or a person under a mental disability
and their interests in legal proceedings.

####  Guarantor

A person or organisation who promises to pay if another person is unable or
unwilling to.

####  GDPR

The [ General Data Protection Regulation ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/overview-of-general-data-protection-regulation/) . The primary EU
data protection law.

###  H

####  _Habeas corpus_

A Latin term meaning “you have the body”. A legal procedure where a person who
is detained can be brought to court to adjudicate on the legality of their
detention.

####  Hostile witness

A [ hostile witness ](/en/justice/witnesses/hostile-witness/) is a witness who
appears to be refusing to fully testify in support of the person who called
them or testifies in a way that significantly differs from their pre-trial
statement. A hostile witness can be cross-examined and asked leading questions
by the person who called them.

##  I - L

###  I

####  In camera

Where proceedings are heard in camera, members of public are not allowed to be
present. Family law proceedings are generally held in camera.

####  Indictable offence

A criminal offence which can be tried before a jury in the [ Circuit Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) or [ Central Criminal Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) .

####  Injunction

A court order either requiring or prohibiting someone from doing something.
Failure to comply with an injunction amounts to contempt of court.

####  _Inter alia_

A Latin term meaning “among other things”. Often used by lawyers when
identifying some but not all relevant things in a broader category.

####  Interim order

An order made on a very short-term basis where only one side is present.
Emergency injunctions are an example of an interim order.

####  Interlocutory injunction

A temporary injunction applying until the end of the full trial.

####  Intestacy

When a person [ dies without a valid will ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-
estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate#lc8139) .

####  ISI – Insolvency Service of Ireland

The state body responsible for all [ personal insolvency ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-
arrangements/) matters.

###  J

####  Judicial review

A challenge brought in the High Court to the decision of a lower court or an
administrative body. A [ judicial review ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-
government-works/standards-and-accountability/judicial-review-public-
decisions/) is separate to an appeal as it tends to focus on the validity of
the decision-making process and not the merits of the decision itself.

####  Jurisdiction

The power of a court or judge to decide an action or make orders or the
territory in which a court can operate.

####  Jurat

The swearing clause at the end of an [ affidavit
](/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/) .

###  L

####  Letters of administration

An authority given to a person to deal with a deceased person’s estate. It is
most commonly granted when a [ person dies without a valid will
](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate#lc8139) .

####  _Lis pendens_

A Latin term meaning “Action pending”. A person can register a lis pendens
against an owner of land when an action is brought in relation to that land.
The registration of a lis pendens means any interested party in the land can
discover the existence of the proceedings.

####  Litigant

A person involved in legal proceedings. A lay litigant is a litigant who is
not represented by a lawyer.

####  _Locus standi_

A Latin term meaning “standing”. The ability of a person to bring proceedings
or be heard by a court. Normally a person needs to have a personal interest in
the subject matter of proceedings to have locus standi to bring those
proceedings.

##  M - Q

###  M

####  Mistrial

A trial which has been declared invalid.

####  Mitigation

In criminal proceedings, mitigation refers to reasons offered for why a
convicted person should receive some leniency in the [ penalty to be imposed
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/) . In civil
proceedings, mitigation offers refers to a person’s obligation to attempt to
reduce any loss they suffer from another person’s wrongdoing.

####  Moratorium

A temporary suspension on a person or entity enforcing their legal rights.

###  N

####  Naturalisation

Giving a citizen of one country [ citizenship of another ](/en/moving-
country/irish-citizenship/becoming-an-irish-citizen-through-naturalisation/) .

####  _Nolle prosequi_

A Latin term meaning “null prosecution”. Where a decision is made to end a
criminal prosecution.

###  P

####  Parole

The conditional early release of prisoner. [ Parole ](/en/justice/prison-
system/remission-and-temporary-release#l3909f) is granted by the Parole Board.

####  Perjury

Giving evidence under oath or after making an affirmation that you know to be
false.

####  Personal data

Your personal data is information that relates to, or can identify you, either
by itself or together with other available information. [ Personal data
](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-
protection-regulation/) can include your name, address, contact details or
CCTV footage

####  Personal representative

An executor or an administrator of the [ estate of a deceased person
](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/dealing-with-the-deceaseds-estate/) .

####  Power of attorney

A legal device that can be set up by a person (the donor) to allow another
specially appointed person (the [ attorney ](/en/death/before-a-death/power-
of-attorney/) ) to take actions on the donor's behalf.

####  Pre-nuptial agreement

An agreement entered into before marriage, normally dealing with each person’s
assets if the marriage later breaks down. [ Pre-nuptial agreements
](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/pre-nuptial-agreements/) are
not always fully binding in Ireland.

####  Plaintiff

A person who brings a claim in the Circuit or High Court.

####  Privilege

Evidence which one side is not obliged to provide to the other side. For
instance, any communications between you and your lawyer in legal proceedings
is normally privileged.

####  Probate

A [ grant of probate ](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-
deceaseds-estate/) allows an executor named in a valid will to deal with a
deceased’s estate.

####  Punitive damages

Damages awarded to show the court’s displeasure. They are intended as a
punishment for the wrongdoer and not purely as compensation for the other
party to whom the damages are awarded

###  Q

####  Qualified cohabitant

An adult in an intimate or committed relationship with another for either (a)
2 or more years where they are the parents of one or more children or (b) five
or more years. A [ qualified cohabitant ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/) is entitled to
seek certain reliefs from a court following the breakdown of a relationship

##  R - S

###  R

####  Remand

A person in custody awaiting a criminal is said to be “on remand”.

####  Reserved judgment

A judgment given at a later date after the court has had time to reflect on
the arguments made.

####  Residuary legacy

The person who receives the rest of a deceased person’s estate after all the
specific gifts and debts are dealt with.

####  Respondent

The person against whom an application or appeal is brought.

####  Right of way

A legal right obliging the owner of land to allow others to cross it. The
extent of the right will differ in each case. For instance, some [ rights of
way ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/) are limited to
pedestrians. Rights of way can be either public or private rights of way.

###  S

####  Sequestration

The confiscation of property by a court until a person purges (remedies) their
contempt.

####  Sheriff

A court officer who is empowered to seize goods pursuant to a court order.
Many county registrars also perform the function of a sheriff.

####  Statute (Statute law)

[ Acts of the Oireachtas ](/en/government-in-ireland/houses-of-the-
oireachtas/legislation/) and previous Acts of other parliaments applicable in
Ireland.

####  Statutory instrument

Secondary law such as an orders, regulations, rules, schemes or bye-laws made
under a power contained in an Act.

####  Subject to contract

An agreement which is not binding until a contract has been signed.

####  Subpoena

An order requiring a person to attend court at a named time. In some cases,
the person who is subpoenaed also has to bring specified documents with them.

####  Summary proceedings

Criminal proceedings being heard in the District Court. There is no jury in
summary proceedings.

####  Summons

An [ order to appear in court ](/en/justice/witnesses/being-a-witness/) .
Civil proceedings in the High Court are often commenced using an “originating
summons”, which requires the other side to enter an appearance.

####  Suspended sentence

A [ sentence ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/) or
part of a sentence which will not take effect if certain conditions are met.

##  T - Z

###  T

####  Tenancy in common

Where there are multiple owners of a piece of land. Each owner has a defined
share and can transfer that share.

####  Testator

A person who [ makes a will ](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-will/) .

####  Title deeds

The documents which prove ownership of a property.

####  Tort

A civil wrong which you can sue for. For example, negligence, defamation and
trespass are all torts.

####  Trust

A legal device where assets are held by a trustee on behalf of other persons
(beneficiaries).

###  U

####  _Ultra vires_

A Latin term meaning “beyond the power”. Where a person or entity goes beyond
their actual powers.

###  V

####  Vicarious liability

Where one person is legally responsible for the acts of another person. For
example, an employer is normally vicariously liable for the acts of its
employee.

###  W

####  Ward of court

A [ ward of court ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/wards-of-court/) is a
person under the care and protection of the court because they are unable to
look after themselves.

####  Without prejudice

Discussions and correspondence between the parties which a court cannot be
informed of. For example, settlement discussions are normally “without
prejudice” discussions.

_**Page edited:** 14 April 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
terms-explained/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Legal%20terms%20explained&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
terms-explained/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
terms-explained/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Legal%20terms%20explained&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
terms-explained/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _International protection terms explained_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/international-protection-terms/)

This document explains some of the terms used in the international protection
process: asylum seekers, Convention and Programme refugees, subsidiary
protection and permission to remain.

1485.3635

  * [ _Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/)

Information about the functions of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators.
This used to be called the Office of the Taxing Master.

1015.31824

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

992.23303

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

