**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal offences ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/) > The law on selling or buying sex

#  The law on selling or buying sex

  * Introduction 
  * Buying sexual services 
  * Selling sexual services 
  * Profiting from people who sell sexual services 
  * Organisations that can help 

##  Introduction

Selling sexual services is legal in Ireland.

However, it is against the law:

  * To buy or offer to buy sexual services 
  * To sell or offer sexual services on behalf of any person other than yourself on a street or other public place 
  * Not to move if asked by a garda who suspects that you are loitering in a public place for the purposes of prostitution by any person other than yourself 
  * To operate a brothel or allow a brothel to be operated in premises that you own or lease 
  * To control or direct the activities of person who provides sexual services and profit from doing so 
  * To compel or coerce someone to sell sexual services and profit from doing so 

The [ Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 2017
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2017/act/2/enacted/en/html) made
important changes to the law on prostitution. It made paying for sexual
services a criminal offence. Previously, paying for sexual services was only
criminal if the person selling sex was either a victim of trafficking or a
minor. It also removed some of the criminal offences that were in place for
selling sexual services.

If you consider yourself or somebody else to be a victim of [ human
trafficking ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-and-crime-
prevention/human-trafficking/) , you should [ report your concerns
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-enforcement/reporting-a-
crime/) to the [ Garda Síochána
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-
siochana-national-police-force/) (Irish police force). In an emergency, you
should call 999 or 112.

Read more about [ human-trafficking
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-and-crime-
prevention/human-trafficking/) .

##  Buying sexual services

It is an offence to pay, promise to pay, or give any other remuneration or
compensation, to another person in exchange for “sexual activity”. If
convicted, you could be fined €500 for a first offence, or €1000 for a second
or subsequent offence. In addition, if the person is trafficked, higher
penalties apply. If convicted by the Circuit Court, the maximum penalties are
5 years in prison, an unlimited fine or both. It is a defence to any charge to
prove that you did not know and had no reasonable grounds for believing that
the person was trafficked.

Sexual activity means any activity that a reasonable person would consider
sexual. The law applies equally to men and women.

It is also an offence to request sexual services from another person in a
public place in exchange for money. If found guilty, an offender could be
fined up to €500 for a first offence, and up to €1,000 for a second or
subsequent offence. In addition, you could be sent to prison for up to 4 weeks
for a third or subsequent offence.

Offering to pay for sexual services from a person under 17 is a far more
serious offence and a court can sentence an offender to up to 5 years
imprisonment for making the request.

##  Selling sexual services

It is not an offence to receive money (or any other form of payment) in
exchange for sexual services. However, it is against the law to advertise this
service.

Sex workers are also not allowed to work together in the same premises. For
example, two sex workers who share an apartment and provide sexual services
there are operating a brothel under the law.

##  Profiting from people who sell sexual services

It is against the law to profit from another person who provides sexual
services, or to control or direct their activities for profit. This is
commonly referred to as ‘pimping’, but may also include keeping a brothel.

It is a criminal offence to coerce a person to provide sexual services for
your own financial benefit.

If found guilty of an offence under these laws, you could be fined up to €5000
and/or sentenced to up to 12 months in prison. For more serious charges, you
could be sentenced to up to 10 years imprisonment and an unlimited fine.

##  Organisations that can help

There are a number of organisations that offer services to sex workers in
Ireland:

  * [ Women’s Health Service ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/) run by the HSE 
  * [ Anti-Human Trafficking Team ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/) run by the HSE 
  * The [ Sex Worker’s Alliance ](https://sexworkersallianceireland.org/) is an advocacy group for sex workers 
  * [ Ruhama ](https://www.ruhama.ie/) offers support to women who are impacted by prostitution and sex trafficking 

The contact details of these organisations are below.

###  HSE Women's Health Service

Meath Primary Care  
1-9 Heytesbury St  
Portobello  
Dublin 8  
D08 Y1TW

**Opening Hours:** Clinic Times: Monday 2pm-4pm and Thursday 1.30pm to 3.30pm

**Tel:** 01 795 8280

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/)

**Email:** [ admin.whp@hse.ie ](mailto:admin.whp@hse.ie)

###  HSE Anti-Human Trafficking Team

Meath Primary Care  
1-9 Heytesbury St  
Portobello  
Dublin 8  
D08 Y1TW

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm

**Tel:** 01 795 8280

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/)

**Email:** [ admin.whp@hse.ie ](mailto:admin.whp@hse.ie)

###  Ruhama

4 Castle Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 EY44

**Opening Hours:** 9am - 5pm, Monday to Friday

**Tel:** 01 8360292

**Locall:** Text REACH to 50100 for free confidential support

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ruhama.ie/ ](https://www.ruhama.ie/)

**Email:** [ admin@ruhama.ie ](mailto:admin@ruhama.ie)

###  Sex Workers Alliance Ireland (SWAI)

13 Dorset Street Lower  
Dublin 1

**Tel:** 0858249305

**Homepage:** [ https://sexworkersallianceireland.org/
](https://sexworkersallianceireland.org/)

**Email:** [ info@swai.eu ](mailto:info@swai.eu)

_**Page edited:** 30 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-
sex/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=The%20law%20on%20selling%20or%20buying%20sex&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-
sex/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-
sex/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=The%20law%20on%20selling%20or%20buying%20sex&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-
sex/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001–2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

1423.2528

  * [ _The law on defamation in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/law-on-defamation/)

You can take legal action against a person or corporation who makes a
‘defamatory statement’ to another person.

1382.1826

  * [ _Laws on cycling in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/cycling-offences/)

Find out about the laws on cycling and the penalties for cycling offences.

1143.0886

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

