**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Courtroom
](/en/justice/courtroom/) > Role of the jury

#  Role of the jury

  * Information 
  * Rules 

##  Information

The jury fulfils a very important function in the legal system. You are
entitled to be tried by jury unless the alleged offence is a minor one or one
that is being tried in the [ Special Criminal Court ](/en/justice/courts-
system/special-criminal-court/) . However, a jury is not required in every
legal case. There will be a jury in some civil cases such as defamation and
assault cases. However, for the majority of civil cases such as personal
injuries actions and family law cases, there is no jury - it is the [ judge
](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) who decides the outcome.

The jury consists of 12 members of the public who sit in a box to one side of
the judge. One of the jurors is selected as a foreman of the jury by the
members of the jury before the case starts. He or she acts as an informal
chairperson and spokesperson for the jury.

The 12 jurors in a case are selected from a number of people who have been
called to do their jury service on that day.

Section 23 of the [ Courts and Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2013/en/act/pub/0032/sec0023.html#sec23)
amended the [ Juries Act 1976
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1976/en/act/pub/0004/index.html) so that the
jury can consist of up to 15 members, if the case is expected to last more
than 2 months.

The jurors are charged with the responsibility of deciding whether, on the
facts of the case, a person is guilty or not guilty of the offence for which
he or she has been charged.

The jury must reach its verdict by considering only the [ evidence
](/en/justice/evidence/evidence-introduction/) introduced in court and the
directions of the judge. The jury does not interpret the law. It follows the
directions of the judge as regards legal matters.

During all stages of the trial, jurors may take notes of proceedings. Jurors
may also pass notes to the foreman or forewoman of the jury to ask the judge
to explain certain aspects of the case.

###  The verdict

At the conclusion of the trial, the jurors are given an issue paper, which
states the issues that the jury must consider in reaching its verdict. When a
jury consists of more than 12 members, only 12 are selected to consider the
verdict.

A Court Garda or other official is required to keep the jury together until
the verdict is reached. The jury is taken into the jury room and allowed no
outside communication at all, with the exception of notes to the Court
Registrar. They may keep a copy of the indictment, the exhibits and their
notes.

Jurors may send out notes asking for the law to be further explained or for
the judge to remind them of the details of the evidence. They will then be
brought back into the court for the judge to give them such assistance as
he/she can but there can be no new evidence at this stage.

In reaching its verdict in a [ criminal trial ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-trial/) , the jury must be satisfied that the
person is guilty _beyond reasonable doubt_ . Beyond reasonable doubt means
that if there are two reasons given in the case and both are possible
explanations for what happened, taken together with the evidence presented,
the jury should give the person the benefit of the doubt and decide on a
verdict of not guilty.

If the case is a civil one, the jury must be satisfied with its verdict on the
balance of probabilities.

It is not necessary that a jury be unanimous in its verdict. In a criminal
case, a verdict need not be unanimous where there are not fewer than 11 jurors
if 10 of them agree on a verdict after considering the case for a reasonable
time (not less than two hours). In a civil trial, a verdict may be reached by
a majority of 9 of the 12 members.

When the jury has reached its decision, it will return to the court and the
verdict will be read out by the foreman or forewoman.

The jury has no role in [ sentencing ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/sentence/) . This decision is left up to the judge following submissions
made by both sides.

For more information about acting as a juror, read our document on [ jury
service ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury-service/) .

##  Rules

Jurors must:

  * Decide the facts of the case only. 
  * Take directions relating to law from the trial judge, whether or not they agree with him/her. 
  * Remain impartial and independent. 
  * Remain uninfluenced by any person. It is an offence for any person who is not a member of the jury to attempt to influence a juror in any way. If any person speaks to a juror about the case, the juror should inform the court or a member of the Garda√≠. 
  * Keep statements made in the jury room confidential. Jurors should not discuss the case with any person other than members of the jury. It is contempt of court punishable by fine and/or imprisonment to repeat any statements made in the jury room. 

_**Page edited:** 10 May 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/jury/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Role%20of%20the%20jury&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/jury/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/jury/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Role%20of%20the%20jury&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/jury/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Jury service_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury-service/)

What is jury service? Find out how members of juries in Ireland are selected,
contacted and your employment rights.

1593.5774

  * [ _Role of the judge_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/)

Judges in a court of law are appointed by the President. Who can be appointed
as a judge and what is their role?

1430.9683

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1259.2699

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

