**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Arrests
](/en/justice/arrests/) > Unlawful arrest and detention

#  Unlawful arrest and detention

  * Introduction 
  * Reasons for your arrest 
  * Arrests without a warrant 
  * When is an arrest or detention unlawful? 
  * Evidence and unlawful arrest or detention 

##  Introduction

This page explains when arrest or detention is unlawful.

If you are [ arrested
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/arrests/) , you must
be brought to a Garda Station without undue delay and informed that you have a
right to consult a [ solicitor
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) .

While you are detained, you have the right to:

  * Reasonable access to a solicitor 
  * Have your solicitor in the room with you while you are being interviewed – you cannot be questioned until your solicitor arrives, except in exceptional circumstances 
  * Be brought before a court at the first possible opportunity 

The maximum period of detention ranges from 24 hours to 7 days, depending on
which [ section of the legislation you are being detained under.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/detention-after-
arrest/#l162fd)

##  Reasons for your arrest

You must be told the reason for your arrest, and this must be explained to you
in an understandable way.

For example, if you are arrested for drink-driving, the Garda is not obliged
to cite the specific provision ("I am arresting you under the provisions of
Section 49 (8) of the Road Traffic Act, 1961").

The Garda just needs to make sure that the provision is explained to you
clearly (“I am arresting you for drink-driving”).

##  Arrests without a warrant

The Gardaí usually need a warrant for your arrest. However, there are
exceptions to this.

If you are arrested for an offence that is punishable by a prison sentence of
5 years or more, the Gardaí do not need a warrant. They just need reasonable
cause to suspect that you are guilty of an offence. This is provided for under
[ Section 4 of the Criminal Law Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0014/sec0004.html#sec4) .

Other laws also give the Gardaí specific powers of arrest. For example, you
can be arrested under the Road Traffic Acts without a warrant if a Garda
suspects that you are committing a drink driving offence.

##  When is an arrest or detention unlawful?

Your arrest is unlawful if the Garda fails to inform you in ordinary language
the reason for your arrest. If this happens the detention which follows is
unlawful.

However, if the reasons for your arrest are given to you at any time during
your detention, your custody becomes lawful from that point on.

###  **If the arrest is a sham or cover**

If your arrest is just a sham or a cover so that you can be questioned in
relation to other offences, then that arrest is unlawful.

###  **After your detention ends**

If your detention period has expired and has not been extended, the Gardaí
must either charge you with the offence or release you from custody.
Otherwise, any order that extends the detention after it has ended is invalid
and the subsequent detention is unlawful.

The exception to this is if the detention expired while a court application to
extend it is pending. In this instance, the detention is deemed not to have
ended until the application has been determined.

###  **If your home was entered unlawfully**

The Constitution (Article 40.5) states that the dwelling of a citizen shall
not be entered forcibly except in accordance with the law. This means that no
one, including the Gardaí, may enter the place where you live without a
warrant or other legal authority to enter.

If you are arrested as a result of an unlawful entry into your home, your
arrest is illegal. [ Evidence
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-
evidence/) obtained as a result of an unlawful entry onto your dwelling may be
inadmissible in court.

##  Evidence and unlawful arrest or detention

If you have been unlawfully arrested, evidence obtained as a result of that
arrest may be inadmissible (not accepted as valid). In the examples below,
whether the evidence is admissible or not depends on whether the prosecution
can prove the mistake was not intentional.

**Arrest under the wrong provision**

If you were mistakenly told by a Garda that you were being arrested under the
wrong provision, the arrest and any blood sample taken may be unlawful. As a
result, it may not be possible to use that blood sample as evidence.

**Evidence gathered while you are unlawfully detained**

If the Gardaí gathers evidence while you are unlawfully detained, this may be
inadmissible. For example, if you have been in custody for longer than the
maximum period allowed and you make a confession, that confession may not be
admissible in evidence against you.

**Access to a solicitor**

If the Gardaí obtains evidence while in breach of your right to reasonable
access to a solicitor, this may also be inadmissible.

For example, if you request a solicitor and your request is refused, any
statements you make to the police will generally be inadmissible as evidence
against you.

You can read more about [ evidence that has been collected unlawfully
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-
evidence/) .

_**Page edited:** 10 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/unlawful-
arrest-and-detention/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Unlawful%20arrest%20and%20detention&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/unlawful-
arrest-and-detention/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/unlawful-
arrest-and-detention/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Unlawful%20arrest%20and%20detention&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/unlawful-
arrest-and-detention/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Detention after arrest_ ](/en/justice/arrests/detention-after-arrest/)

What is the legal basis for detaining you after you have been arrested?

1693.0072

  * [ _Evidence that has been collected unlawfully_ ](/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-evidence/)

Evidence that has been collected in deliberate and conscious breach of your
constitutional rights cannot be admitted in courts in Ireland.

1138.3066

  * [ _Arrests_ ](/en/justice/arrests/arrests/)

What happens if you are arrested in Ireland? Find out more about warrants and
the rules governing arrests.

966.21985

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

