**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Courts system
](/en/justice/courts-system/) > Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators

#  Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators

  * Role of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators 
  * Types of cost disputes that can be adjudicated 
  * Charges to clients by barristers and solicitors 
  * Complaints about excessive charges by lawyers 
  * How to apply for adjudication of legal costs 
  * Where to apply for adjudication of legal costs 

##  Role of the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators

The Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators can give you an independent
assessment of the legal costs payable by you or a company when involved in
litigation in the [ High Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) , [
Court of Appeal ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/court-of-appeal/) or the [ Supreme Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/)
.

If you are involved in a legal dispute, the Office of the Legal Costs
Adjudicators assesses the fair and reasonable amount that one party has to pay
to the other side.

This service is available to individuals and companies involved in litigation
in the [ High Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/high-court/) , [ Court of Appeal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-
appeal/) or the [ Supreme Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/)
.

There are currently 2 Legal Costs Adjudicators (a Chief Legal Costs
Adjudicator and a Legal Costs Adjudicator) in Ireland. Both of these are based
in Dublin. The Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators office was previously
known as the Office of the Taxing Master.

##  Types of cost disputes that can be adjudicated

Usually, costs are adjudicated at the end of a case. However, a court may
award costs for certain applications before the final conclusion of the case.

If you are claiming costs (this is usually done by the successful plaintiff or
defendant), you must demonstrate that the costs you are claiming are:

  * Appropriate 
  * Fair, and 
  * Reasonable 

There are two main types of costs you can claim:

###  1\. Party and party costs

These are essentially all the costs, charges and expenses that are necessary
and appropriate for the purpose of the case. It's important to remember that
all the costs may not be allowable and if you are claiming party and party
costs - you must be able to justify why each cost was incurred and why those
costs should be allowed.

In the past, the courts have held that when you are conducting your case you
must remember that your adversary may have to pay your costs (or you may have
to pay theirs). It is important, therefore, that you are careful about any
costs you incur.

###  **2\. Legal practitioner and client costs**

These are the costs which have been reasonably incurred, but may not have been
absolutely necessary, and are not recoverable under party and party costs.
Excessive charges are not recoverable.

A court must make a court order for legal practitioner and client costs.
Otherwise, costs will be adjudicated on a party and party cost basis.

##  Charges to clients by barristers and solicitors

When you appoint a solicitor, before the case starts they should give you a
detailed estimate of the costs they expect you will need to pay. This forms
part of your contract with them.

The way [ solicitors
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) and [
barristers
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) should
charge you is set out in the [ Legal Services Regulation Act 2015 (Part 10)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/65/section/138/enacted/en/html%22%20/l%20%22part10)
.

If a barrister is engaged, they must provide a similarly detailed estimate to
your solicitor, which is then passed to you. Alternatively, if possible, the
client and the lawyers can agree the amount or amounts to be paid.

###  **Bill of Costs**

At the end of the case, the solicitor should give you a detailed statement of
all the legal costs associated with your case. This is called the Bill of
Costs and must contain:

  * A summary of the legal services they provided 
  * Details of all the charges that were incurred and the nature of these charges 
  * The amount of VAT charged 
  * The amount of time spent on a legal matter if costs are calculated based on time 
  * The financial outcome of the case, i.e. any damages or other money recovered or that should be paid to you 
  * If any costs have been paid or must be paid by another party 

The Bill of Costs must be provided with an explanation in writing of how any
aspect of the Bill of Costs can be challenged by a client.

##  Complaints about excessive charges by lawyers

Other than deciding if the costs charged in the legal dispute are fair, the
Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators does not have any regulatory or
investigative powers for complaints about excessive charges by lawyers.

If you have a complaint about excessive charges, you should refer the matter
to the [ Legal Services Regulatory Authority
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/legal-services-
regulatory-authority/) (LSRA). If the LSRA finds the charges are grossly
excessive, such charges will be treated as professional misconduct.

##  How to apply for adjudication of legal costs

Before trying to have any aspect of a Bill of Costs adjudicated, you must
first attempt to agree the Bill of Costs.

###  **Apply through your solicitor or legal costs accountant**

If you still want to have the costs adjudicated, you should instruct your
solicitor or legal costs accountant to submit a [ Notice of Application for
Adjudication of Costs
](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/7766888d-8646-453e-88ea-3a2588d36dcd/Form%201%20-%20Notice%20of%20Application%20for%20Adjudication%20of%20%20%20Costs%20%28Party%20and%20Party%29.docx/doc/1)
to the Office of Legal Costs Adjudicators and the relevant documentation. Your
legal representative can also apply electronically.

[ Your legal representative can also apply electronically
](https://www.courts.ie/legal-costs-adjudication) .

Your representative will then be notified of the date of the adjudication, and
you may attend the hearing. It is important to remember that you can retain a
legal representative for the adjudication hearing.

###  **Apply directly**

If your solicitor does not apply for adjudication, you can do so yourself. You
must:

  * Complete and lodge the Notice of Application for Adjudication of Costs form (in duplicate form) 
  * Lodge the Bill of Costs and all supporting documentation with the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators. 

The Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators will then inform you when you
should attend the hearing.

You must then serve on the other side:

  * All the documents above 
  * A copy of the issued Notice of Application for Adjudication of Costs. 
  * Tell them the date when the matter will next come before the Legal Costs Adjudicator. 

##  Where to apply for adjudication of legal costs

You can get more [ information about adjudication of costs
](https://www.courts.ie/legal-costs-adjudication) from the website of the
Courts Service.

Apply to the Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators at:

###  Office of the Legal Costs Adjudicators

1st Floor  
Merchants House  
27-30 Merchants Quay  
Dublin 8  
D08 K3KD  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6301

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/office-legal-costs-adjudicators-
high-court-formerly-known-taxing-masters-office
](https://www.courts.ie/content/office-legal-costs-adjudicators-high-court-
formerly-known-taxing-masters-office)

**Email:** [ info_legalcostsadjudicators@courts.ie
](mailto:info_legalcostsadjudicators@courts.ie)

_**Page edited:** 13 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/office-of-the-legal-costs-
adjudicators/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Office%20of%20the%20Legal%20Costs%20Adjudicators&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/office-of-the-legal-costs-
adjudicators/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Office%20of%20the%20Legal%20Costs%20Adjudicators&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/office-of-the-legal-costs-adjudicators/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Office of the Ombudsman_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/)

The main duty of the Irish Ombudsman is to investigate complaints made by
members of the public about how they have been treated by public bodies in
Ireland.

3233.4023

  * [ _UN Convention on the Rights of the Child_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-of-the-child/)

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out the basic human rights
to which every child is entitled. Ireland ratified the Convention on 28
September 1992. Find out more.

2072.552

  * [ _Role of the jury_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury/)

The jury fulfils a very important role in the legal system in Ireland. Who are
the jury and why is a jury not required in every case?

1993.8455

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

