**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Legal aid and
advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/) > Criminal Legal Aid Certificates

#  Criminal Legal Aid Certificates

  * Types of legal aid certificates 
  * Where to apply for criminal legal aid certificates 

##  Types of legal aid certificates

If a judge decides you should be granted [ criminal legal aid
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid/) , you will be issued a
legal aid certificate.

To get any of the legal aid certificates listed below, you must apply and show
that you do not have enough means to pay for legal representation or, in the
case of a child, the child or the child's parents or guardian do not enough
means. There are penalties, including imprisonment, for providing false or
misleading information to obtain a certificate.

The court must also be satisfied that the offence, you are charged with, is of
such a serious nature, or there are such exceptional circumstances, that it is
essential in the interest of justice that legal aid be provided.

There are a number of legal aid certificates:

  * Legal aid (District Court) certificate 
  * Legal aid (trial on indictment) certificate 
  * Legal aid (appeal) certificate 
  * Legal aid (case stated) certificate 
  * Legal aid (Supreme Court) certificate 
  * Special Criminal Court certificate 
  * Legal aid (behaviour order) certificate 
  * Legal aid (civil order) certificate 
  * Legal aid (monitoring order) certificate 
  * Legal aid (protection of persons order) certificate 
  * Legal aid (re-trial order) certificate 

##  Where to apply for criminal legal aid certificates

###  Legal aid (District Court) certificate

When you are first charged and brought before the [ District Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) you can apply for a legal aid
(District Court) certificate. This certificate entitles the [ solicitor
](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) assigned to the case to be paid for all
his or her appearances in the District Court.

If the charge is murder or if the case is of sufficient complexity and
gravity, the legal aid (District Court) certificate will entitle you to both a
solicitor and [ barrister ](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) at the District
Court stage.

###  Legal aid (trial on indictment) certificate

If you are sent forward from the District Court for trial at the [ Circuit
Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) or the [ Central Criminal
Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) you can apply for a legal aid
(trial on indictment) certificate. You can apply to the District Court when it
is sending you forward for trial or, you can apply to the court where your
case is dealt with.

You must be charged with murder or it must appear to the court that, in the
interest of justice, you should have legal aid to help you prepare and defend
your case.

This certificate will entitle you to both a solicitor and barrister.

###  Legal aid (appeal) certificate

If you have been convicted of a criminal offence and you want to appeal that
conviction or the penalty imposed, you can apply for a legal aid (appeal)
certificate. The application is usually made to the court before which you
have been convicted. If the application is refused in that court you can still
get the certificate by applying to the court in which your appeal is to be
heard.

There are two ways of applying to the appeal court:

  * By sending a letter to the registrar of the court stating the facts of the case and the grounds for your appeal 
  * By applying directly to the court itself 

To be eligible for the certificate, the conviction must be for murder, or the
court must be satisfied that due to the serious nature of the offence it is
necessary, in the interests of justice, that you should have legal aid.

The certificate entitles you to a solicitor. If the appeal is to the [ Court
of Appeal ](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/) , however, you are
also entitled to a barrister.

###  Legal aid (case stated) certificate

If you are charged with an offence before the District Court or Circuit Court,
or you are appealing to the Circuit Court against a conviction by the District
Court, the judge who is hearing the case may refer a question of law which
arises from the hearing to the [ High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-
court/) , the [ Court of Appeal ](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/)
or the [ Supreme Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/) . This is
known as a case stated. Similarly, the District Court judge hearing the case
may state a case for the opinion of the High Court. In these situations you
can apply for a legal aid (case stated) certificate.

If the application to the District Court or Circuit Court is refused, you can
apply to the court that will hear the case stated. This can be done by:

  * Sending a letter to the registrar of the court setting out the facts of the case and the reason for the application or 
  * Applying directly to the court 

To be eligible the offence must be of a serious nature or exceptional
circumstances must apply. This certificate entitles you to both a solicitor
and barrister.

###  Legal aid (Supreme Court) certificate

If you are appealing a finding of the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court you
can apply for a legal aid (Supreme Court) certificate. Similarly, if you are
charged with an offence, you can apply for a certificate if you make an appeal
to the Supreme Court about a finding of the High Court on a case stated by a
District Court judge. Where you are appealing a finding of the High Court the
offence must be of a serious nature or exceptional circumstances must apply.

If the application for a legal aid (Supreme Court) certificate is refused, you
can apply to the Supreme Court for a certificate by writing to the registrar
or applying directly to the court.

This certificate entitles you to both a solicitor and barrister.

###  Special Criminal Court certificate

The [ Special Criminal Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/special-criminal-
court/) can grant a legal aid certificate to a person charged with an offence
before the Special Criminal Court. The conditions that apply are exactly the
same as those for a legal aid (trial on indictment) certificate.

This certificate entitles you to the services of both a solicitor and a
barrister.

###  Legal aid (behaviour order) certificate

If your child (under age 18) is the subject of any court proceedings relating
to a [ behaviour order ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/anti-social-
behaviour-by-children/) you may be able to apply for a legal aid (behaviour
order) certificate. The alleged anti-social behaviour must be considered to be
of a serious nature or there must be exceptional circumstances.

If a certificate is granted, your child is entitled to a solicitor for:

  * An application by the Gardaí for a behaviour order 
  * An application by you or your child to vary or discharge a behaviour order 

You child is entitled to a solicitor and a barrister (if considered
appropriate) for:

  * An appeal by you or your child against the making of a behaviour order 
  * Any proceedings in the High Court, Court of Appeal or Supreme Court which result from the application for or the appeal against a behaviour order 

###  Legal aid (civil order) certificate

If you are the subject of any court proceedings relating to a [ civil order
](/en/justice/law-enforcement/anti-social-behaviour-by-adults/) you may be
able to apply for a legal aid (civil order) certificate. The alleged anti-
social behaviour must be of a serious nature or there must be exceptional
circumstances.

If a certificate is granted, you are entitled to a solicitor for:

  * An application by the Gardaí for a civil order 
  * An application by you to vary or discharge a civil order 

You are entitled to a solicitor and a barrister (if considered appropriate)
for:

  * An appeal by you against the making of a civil order 
  * Any proceedings in the High Court, Court of Appeal or Supreme Court which result from the application for or the appeal against a civil order 

###  Legal aid (monitoring order) certificate

If you are subject to a monitoring order and intend applying to the courts to
have it varied or revoked, you may be able to apply for a legal aid
(monitoring order) certificate. The conditions specified in the monitoring
order must be of such a nature or the circumstances so exceptional that the
court feels legal aid should be granted in the interests of justice.

This certificate entitles you to the services of a solicitor and, if
considered appropriate by the court, a barrister.

###  Legal aid (protection of persons order) certificate

If you are subject to a protection of persons order and intend applying to the
courts to have it varied or revoked, you may be able to apply for a legal aid
(protection of persons order) certificate. The legal aid must be necessary in
the interests of justice due to the conditions of the protection of persons
order or exceptional circumstances.

This certificate entitles you to the services of a solicitor and, if
considered appropriate by the court, a barrister.

###  Legal aid (re-trial order) certificate

If you are the subject of any proceedings in the Court of Appeal relating to a
re-trial order, you may be able to apply for a legal aid (re-trial order)
certificate. It must appear to the court that, in the interests of justice,
you should have legal aid to assist you in the preparation and conduct of your
case.This certificate entitles you to both a solicitor and a barrister.

_**Page edited:** 26 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid-
certificates/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Criminal%20Legal%20Aid%20Certificates&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid-
certificates/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid-
certificates/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Criminal%20Legal%20Aid%20Certificates&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid-certificates/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Criminal legal aid_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid/)

You must fulfil certain criteria to qualify for criminal legal aid. Find out
about the cases where legal aid is granted and how to apply.

1990.3606

  * [ _Civil legal aid and legal advice_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/)

An explanation of civil legal aid and legal advice and the eligibility
criteria to be able to avail of it.

1833.4825

  * [ _Legal aid for asylum seekers_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/legal-aid-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

Legal aid is available to people who are applying for international protection
in Ireland.

1608.4609

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

