**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Evidence
](/en/justice/evidence/) > Privileged evidence

#  Privileged evidence

  * Introduction 
  * Private privilege 
  * Public interest privilege 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

In certain circumstances you can use a special right that means you can refuse
to hand over documents to the court or answer certain questions even if those
documents or questions are relevant to the case. This is called the _doctrine
of privilege_ .

There are two main types of privilege:

  * Private privilege 
  * Public interest privilege 

##  Private privilege

You have a "privilege against self-incrimination". This means that you can
refuse to answer questions or hand over documents that may implicate you in
criminal proceedings.

You may have a "legal professional privilege". This means that a legal advisor
and their client cannot be forced to reveal communications between them.

In addition, if any communication is made when legal action is being
considered, then that communication is privileged even if it is not a
communication between lawyer and client.

Priests are allowed to refuse to answer questions relating to what was said in
the confessional. This is known as the _sacerdotal privilege_ . Similarly,
communications with a counsellor may also be privileged.

##  Public interest privilege

Public interest privilege can only be used by the State. In some very limited
circumstances, the State can refuse to disclose information or documents in
order to protect the public interest. For example, documents about the
structure and engineering of army equipment might be privileged in order to
protect national security.

##  Further information

You should get legal advice for more detailed information on this.

_**Page edited:** 25 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/privileged-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Privileged%20evidence&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/privileged-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/privileged-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Privileged%20evidence&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/privileged-
evidence/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Coming to set up a business or invest in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-ireland/)

Information for foreign nationals on the immigrant investor and entrepreneur
schemes.

877.69006

  * [ _Enrol your child in primary school when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-primary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)

Information on choosing a primary school, how to apply for a school place,
receiving an offer and where to find help if you canâ€™t find a suitable school.

841.41364

  * [ _Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)

Information on buying car insurance after you return to Ireland, how to use
your claims free driving experience from abroad and what to do if you are
refused insurance cover.

840.513

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

