**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Courts system
](/en/justice/courts-system/) > District Court

#  District Court

  * Introduction 
  * Civil matters 
  * Criminal matters 
  * Further Information 

##  Introduction

The District Court is the lowest court in the Irish court system. It is
regulated by the President of the District Court and up to 71 District Court
judges.

The District Court is organised on a regional basis. There are 23 District
Court Districts, as well as the Dublin Metropolitan District. Each District is
divided into [ District Court areas ](https://www.courts.ie/content/map-
district-court-areas) and has one or more judges permanently assigned to it.

The District Court is a court of local and limited jurisdiction. This means it
can only make orders or decisions on certain types of civil and criminal
cases.  

##  Civil matters

**Local jurisdiction**

Civil cases must be brought, heard and decided in the correct District Court
area.

If you are the **respondent** , you must bring the case to the District Court
area where you or one of the respondents lives or works.

If you are the **claimant** , you can choose a different District Court area
depending on the type of case:

  * In proceedings based on contract, you can choose the District Court area where the contract was made 
  * In proceedings based on tort (personal injuries actions), you can choose the District Court area where the injury is alleged to have happened 
  * In proceedings to evict a person from land or property, you can choose the District Court area where the land or property is located 

A District Court can only hear a case that has been commenced in the correct
District Court area.

###  Limited jurisdiction

The District Court can only hear civil cases where the requested damages or
compensation is less than €15,000.

For example, the District Court can hear:

  * Contract cases where the claim does not exceed €15,000 
  * Hire-purchase and credit-sale agreement actions where the hire-purchase price of the goods, or the amount of the claim does not exceed €15,000 
  * Personal injury cases where the claim for compensation does not exceed €15,000 
  * Eviction cases for non-payment of rent, or for remaining in a property after getting a valid notice, if the annual rent does not exceed €15,000 
  * Actions for the wrongful detention of goods where the value of the goods claimed does not exceed €15,000 

The District Court can also hear civil cases about:

  * Family law, and can make decisions and orders about domestic violence, guardianship, maintenance and child care 
  * Enforcing judgements, and it has the power to examine debtors means, order that debts be paid by instalments, and send debtors to prison for defaulting on payments 
  * Licensing, for example, granting certificates for intoxicating liquor licences, certificates for auctioneer's, lottery licences, and licences for public dancing 

##  Criminal matters

###  Local jurisdiction

A criminal case is heard in the District Court area where:

  * The offence was committed, or 
  * The accused lives or works, or 
  * The accused was arrested 

###  Limited jurisdiction

There are two types of criminal offences:

  * Summary or minor offences, which are tried by a judge sitting alone 
  * Indictable or serious offences, which can be tried by a judge and jury 

You can read more about [ the classification of crimes in criminal cases
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-
criminal-cases/) .

The District Court mainly deals with summary offences, however it can deal
with indictable offences in certain situations.

####  **Indictable offences which can be tried summarily**

Certain indictable offences can be tried summarily by a judge in the District
Court if the following conditions are met:

  * The judge reviews the facts of the case and considers the offence to be a minor offence 
  * The accused is informed of their right to be tried by a jury in a higher court but agrees to be tried summarily (by the judge, alone) in the District Court 
  * The [ Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) ](https://www.dppireland.ie/) agrees to the summary trial in the District Court 

The types of offences that this option applies to are specified in the
appropriate legislation.

####  Indictable offences that may be dealt with summarily

Certain other indictable offences can be tried summarily in the District Court
if all the following conditions are met:

  * The accused pleads guilty in the District Court 
  * The judge is satisfied that the accused understands the charge 
  * The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) agrees that the case can be tried in the District Court 

This option is not available for the following offences:

  * Rape 
  * Aggravated sexual assault 
  * Murder 
  * Treason and piracy 

If the judge decides that a case cannot be dealt with by the [ District Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) , the accused person is sent
forward to the [ Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) for
sentence. At the Circuit Court, they can withdraw their guilty plea and change
it to, not guilty. If this happens, the accused person will face a trial with
a jury present.

####  **Indictable offences which cannot be tried summarily in the District
Court**

Certain cases must be heard by a judge and jury and cannot be tried summarily
in the District Court. In these cases, the accused is served with a Book of
Evidence, which includes:

  * A statement of the charge 
  * A statement of the evidence to be introduced to the court 
  * A list of witnesses and exhibits 

The District Court Judge will send the accused forward to the Circuit Court or
Central Criminal Court for trial once the book of evidence has been served and
the DPP has agreed to send the case forward.

##  Further Information

For more information about the District Court, including information about
lodging a case, you should contact your local District Court office.

You can also [ book an appointment ](https://www.courts.ie/appointments)
online to attend some court offices. This service is for non-urgent matters
only.

For more general queries, you can contact:

###  Courts Service

15-24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 F95Y  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://courts.ie/ ](https://courts.ie/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us
](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)

_**Page edited:** 13 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=District%20Court&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=District%20Court&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _District Court procedures_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/district-court-procedures/)

A claim notice is used to commence proceedings in the District Court. Find out
more about the forms that are used and the procedures that are followed.

1971.1598

  * [ _Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/)

The Court of Justice of the European Union ensures that European law is
interpreted and applied in each member state. Find out about the other
important functions of this court.

1511.7986

  * [ _High Court_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/)

The High Court has jurisdiction in criminal and civil cases. Find out where,
and how matters are heard in this court.

1444.5603

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

