**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Prison system
](/en/justice/prison-system/) > Visiting someone in prison

#  Visiting someone in prison

  * Introduction 
  * COVID-19 updates 
  * How to arrange a visit 
  * How visits work 
  * Money transfers to prisoners’ accounts 
  * Rights and entitlements of prisoners 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If a member of your family is in prison, visits can help you stay in contact
and maintain a healthy relationship. You can also keep in touch by letter and
your family member can contact you by telephone.

Prison visits are important to maintain relationships and support the
prisoner's mental wellbeing. Stable family relationships and community ties
have also been recognised as important factors in helping with the [
resettlement and reintegration ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-
services/reintegration/) of prisoners in civil society.

The rules governing prison visits in Ireland are set out in [ sections 35-50
of Prison Rules, 2007
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2007/si/252/made/en/print#article35) .

You can find out more about the process of [ requesting a professional visit
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/visiting-a-prison/requesting-a-professional-
visit/) to a prisoner on the Irish Prison Service website.

##  COVID-19 updates

The Irish Prison Service has [ reintroduced physical visits
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/entitlement-to-weekly-physical-visits-restored-
in-all-prisons/) . Prisoners can have a video visit instead of a physical
visit if they prefer.

A maximum of 5 persons are allowed per visit with a maximum of 3 adults. You
must wear a face covering.

You can [ continue to arrange video visits
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/receive-family-video-visit/) using the Irish
Prison Service website.

##  How to arrange a visit

A minimum of 48 hours’ notice must be given when requesting a visit to any
prison in Ireland.

Visits can be requested [ online ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/requesting-a-
physical-visit/) , over the phone or, in some cases, in person at the
visitors’ centre. You can read the Irish Prison Service’s [ Family Information
Booklet for information (pdf) ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/wp-
content/uploads/documents_pdf/Family-Information-Booklet-September-2020.pdf)
about how visits work.

When submitting an online request for a visit, you must provide:

  * The name and PRIS number of the prisoner you wish to visit, and whether you wish to visit in person or online 
  * Your name, date of birth, address, email and telephone number 
  * Details of any extra visitors coming with you (if any) 
  * Up to 2 proposed visit times and dates 
  * The number of children you will bring (if any) 

A visit is not confirmed until a formal email is received confirming the date
and time of the intended visit from the prison. This should be printed off and
brought with you to the prison when visiting.

##  How visits work

In most cases, a prisoner can nominate at least 6 people who may visit them.
If you are not on the list, it is unlikely that you be able to arrange a
visit. This is the case irrespective of your relationship to the prisoner, and
a prisoner does not have to meet with a visitor.

###  Identification

You must bring valid photo identification to the prison, such as a current
passport or driver’s license. If you don’t, you may be refused entry.

You must also identify the prisoner you are visiting and provide details of
your relationship to them.

###  Security

Airport-style walk-through detectors and x-ray scanners are installed in every
closed prison in Ireland, and sniffer dogs from the Garda Canine Unit may also
be present for the purposes of detecting banned substances.

You may be searched to ensure that you are not in possession of prohibited
materials upon entering the prison. The search must be carried out with due
regard to your decency and it must be conducted by at least 2 prison guards of
your gender.

If you do not consent to be searched, the governor can refuse you entry to the
prison.

###  What can I take into a prison?

Visitors are required to deposit their phones and any personal items in the
area provided at the visitors centre before entering the prison.

If you want to give something to your family member, you must [ check that it
is permitted by the prison ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/visiting-a-
prison/visiting-terms-conditions/) in advance. Anything you take in must be
handed to the officer in charge of visits.

You will not be allowed to enter a prison if you are carrying any of following
items:

  * Mobile phones or chargers 
  * Any item which could be used as a weapon, particularly sharp items 
  * Medicines and drugs, including prescription drugs 

###  The visit

All prisons implement certain measures to regulate and monitor visits in the
interests of health and safety. Most visits are supervised in sight, but not
in hearing.

For example, while prisons must provide facilities to allow a prisoner and
visitor to see and talk to one another, the visit may be screened with the use
of glass, or other types of screens, to prevent physical contact.

It is at the discretion of the prison governor to allow physical contact
between a prisoner and a visitor when they are satisfied that such contact
will not facilitate the entry into the prison of controlled drugs or other
prohibited articles or substances.

The Irish Council for Prisoners Overseas has [ published a guide (pdf)
](https://www.icpo.ie/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Guidelines-For-Visiting-
Prisoners.pdf) on how to get the most out of a prison visit, including advice
on planning visits and respecting prison rules.

###  Children visiting a prison

In most cases, anyone under the age of 18 who is visiting a prison must be
accompanied by an adult.

Due to prison security measures and the regulated nature of visits, it can
often be a stressful experience for a child to visit somebody in prison. It
can be beneficial, therefore, to prepare a child on what to expect when
visiting a prison.

You can read the Irish Prison Service’s [ Family Information Booklet (pdf)
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/wp-content/uploads/documents_pdf/Family-
Information-Booklet-September-2020.pdf) for information about how visits work.

##  Money transfers to prisoners’ accounts

You can transfer funds to people in prison. All transactions should be
completed within 2 to 5 working days.

For general queries about lodging money into a prisoner’s account, you can
email [ PAMSCash@irishprisons.ie ](mailto:PAMSCash@irishprisons.ie) .

**An Post BillPay Card**

Your relative or friend in prison must nominate you as a person who can
receive [ An Post BillPay card (pdf) ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/wp-
content/uploads/documents_pdf/Using-An-Post-BillPay-Cards.pdf) from the Irish
Prison Service.

Once you receive the BillPay Card, you can call in to any post office in
Ireland, hand the BillPay Card in at the counter and lodge funds in cash or by
debit card.

You will be given a receipt, which you should keep as proof of payment. The
maximum transaction is €200. The card may be shared by family members to send
funds to the person in custody.

**Bank transfer**

You can also transfer funds from your bank account to that of a friend or
relative in prison [ by bank transfer (pdf) ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/wp-
content/uploads/documents_pdf/Making-an-Electronic-Money-Transfer-to-Prisoner-
Account.pdf) .

You can do this through your bank’s website or app, or by calling into your
bank. The maximum transaction is €200 and any payment over this amount will be
returned.

To make the transfer, you will need:

  * The Irish Prison Service’s [ BIC and IBAN (pdf) ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/wp-content/uploads/documents_pdf/Making-an-Electronic-Money-Transfer-to-Prisoner-Account.pdf) , and 
  * The prisoner ID number, which should be entered into the reference box for the transaction (if not entered or entered incorrectly, the person in custody cannot receive the funds) 

##  Rights and entitlements of prisoners

The visitation entitlements of prisoners vary based on their custodial status.

The Irish Prison Service also operates an Incentivised Regimes Policy,
rewarding prisoners for good behaviour with increased visitation and other
entitlements. You can read more about the [ Incentivised Regimes Policy (pdf)
](http://www.irishprisons.ie/images/pdf/incentivisedregimespolicy.pdf) .

You can also learn more about prisoners’ rights and entitlements in our page
on [ prison conditions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/prison-conditions/) .

###  Physical or online visits

Prisoners are entitled to receive at least one family visit per week, which
can be either online or in person. If the visit is online, it can last up to
20 minutes.

The following rules apply for physical visits:

  * A sentenced prisoner who is 18 or over is allowed a minimum of one 30 minute visit from relatives or friends each week 
  * A sentenced prisoner who is under 18 is allowed a minimum of 2, 30 minute visits from relatives or friends each week 
  * A remand prisoner is allowed one visit per day from relatives or friends for at least 15 minutes a minimum of 3 times a week 

A remand prisoner is someone who has yet to be convicted of a criminal offence
and is remanded in custody while awaiting trial. You can read more about the [
rights of remand prisoners
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/detention-after-
arrest/) .

The governor of a prison can allow for additional or longer visits where
circumstances permit. They may also prohibit a prisoner from receiving
visitors.

###  Telephone calls

Subject to the availability of facilities:

  * A convicted prisoner who is 18 or over is entitled to make at least one telephone call per week to a family member or friend 
  * A convicted prisoner under 18 is entitled to make at least 2 telephone calls per week to a family member or friend 
  * A remand prisoner is entitled to make at least 5 telephone calls per week to a family member or friend, and as many telephone calls as are reasonably necessary for the purpose of managing their property or business affairs 

In strictly limited circumstances, where a governor has grounds to believe
that a phone call may compromise the health and safety of a prisoner or member
of the community, they may order that a call be monitored, recorded or
prematurely terminated.

###  Letters

A prisoner is entitled to send letters to their family and friends, and to
receive as many letters as are sent to them.

However, any prisoner who sends more than 7 letters in a single week may have
to pay for postage and writing materials for any more letters they send.

####  Examination of letters

The governor can open, examine and confiscate:

  * A letter being sent by a prisoner if its contents are suspected of undermining the safety and welfare of others (this does not apply to a letter to a professional recipient, such as a legal advisor or court official) 
  * A letter that has been sent to a prisoner if there are grounds to believe that its contents may compromise secure custody in prison, or would facilitate or hamper an investigation into a criminal offence 

###  Foreign nationals

The following rules apply if you are a foreign national:

  * A foreign national is entitled to receive a visit from their consul 
  * A stateless person is entitled to receive a visit from the consul of a state of their choosing 
  * An asylum applicant is entitled to receive a visit from a consul of a state of their choosing, as well as any national or international organisations deemed appropriate by the Minister for Justice 

Unless the governor otherwise directs, all such visits to foreign nationals
will take place in the hearing and view of a prison officer.

##  Further information

###  Irish Prison Service

IDA Business Park  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
Co. Longford  
Ireland

**Tel:** (043) 333 5100

**Fax:** (043) 333 5371

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irishprisons.ie ](http://www.irishprisons.ie)

**Email:** [ info@irishprisons.ie ](mailto:info@irishprisons.ie)

_**Page edited:** 30 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/visiting-someone-in-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Visiting%20someone%20in%20prison&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/visiting-someone-in-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/visiting-someone-in-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Visiting%20someone%20in%20prison&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/prison-
system/visiting-someone-in-prison/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Prison system in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/prison-system/prison-system-in-ireland/)

This document provides practical information about the structure and operation
of the prison system in Ireland.

1133.1167

  * [ _Prisoners' rights_ ](/en/justice/prison-system/prisoners-rights/)

The main source of prisoners' rights is the Prison Rules 2007. Find out more.

945.7586

  * [ _Irish prisoners overseas_ ](/en/justice/prison-system/irish-prisoners-overseas/)

Irish prisoners overseas face significant difficulties and in some
jurisdictions prison conditions and safety can be a major cause of concern.

932.6603

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

