**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Witnesses
](/en/justice/witnesses/) > Affidavits

#  Affidavits

  * Introduction 
  * What should an affidavit include? 
  * Swearing an affidavit 
  * Swearing by video-conference 
  * Affidavit fees 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

An affidavit is a sworn written statement from a [ witness
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/being-a-witness/) in
a case. It is a document that sets out the [ evidence
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/evidence/evidence-
introduction/) that the witness wants to give. The witness who swears an
affidavit is known as a deponent.

Affidavits are sometimes written and prepared by a [ solicitor
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) or a [
barrister
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) after
they get all the necessary information from the witness.

It is possible to swear affidavits for use in the [ Circuit Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/)
, [ High Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/high-court/) , [ Court of Appeal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-
appeal/) or [ Supreme Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/)
by video-conference (see ‘Swearing by video-conference’ below).

###  Cases without an oral hearing

Some cases do not involve an oral hearing with witnesses giving evidence in
court. Instead, these cases are dealt with using only affidavits.

For example, if the plaintiff (the person bringing the case) issues a [
summary summons ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/high-court-procedures/#a179e8) , it will be accompanied by an affidavit
setting out the facts of the case. The defendant can then respond by swearing
their own affidavit.

The judge may be able to decide the case by reading the affidavits, which is a
quicker and less expensive procedure.

##  What should an affidavit include?

An affidavit must include:

  * The title of the case 
  * The identity of the person making the affidavit 
  * The occupation and address of the person making the affidavit 
  * A statement that the witness is over 18 years of age or, if they are not over 18, the age of the witness 
  * The evidence, which must generally be facts that the witness is able to prove of their own knowledge, and it must also state how they got this knowledge 
  * The signature of the witness and the date they signed it 
  * A _jurat,_ which is a section on the affidavit where the Commissioner for Oaths or practising solicitor verifies and signs that the affidavit was properly sworn 

The evidence the witness gives must be set out clearly in numbered paragraphs.
The language can be less formal than the language used in formal pleadings.

The rules for affidavits are set out in the [ court rules
](http://www.courts.ie/rules.nsf/webpages/bb9a582b582f736880256d2b003f6633?OpenDocument&l=en&p=042)
for the Superior, Circuit and District courts.

##  Swearing an affidavit

When your affidavit is ready, you should go to an independent [ Commissioner
for Oaths ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/commissioners-for-oaths/) or practising [ solicitor
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) who
will verify the affidavit.

Before you swear the oath, they will check that you have read the affidavit
and fully understand its contents.

You will be asked to raise an appropriate religious text to your beliefs, such
as the Bible, and to repeat the words of the oath. If you do not want to swear
an oath on the Bible, you can make an affirmation. You then sign the
affidavit.

The Commissioner for Oaths will verify that the affidavit was properly sworn
by completing and signing a _jurat_ on the affidavit.

###  Submitting the affidavit to court

Once the affidavit has been sworn, it can then be submitted as evidence to the
court.

To do this, you lodge the affidavit with the appropriate court office and pay
the relevant fee (see ‘Affidavit fees’ below). You then send a duplicate copy
of the affidavit to the other party in the case.

##  Swearing by video-conference

It is possible to swear affidavits for use in the Circuit Court, High Court,
Court of Appeal or Supreme Court by video-conference where the witness cannot
attend in person with the Commissioner for Oaths or practising solicitor who
is to verify the affidavit.

It may not be practicable for example due to health issues, which affect the
ability to meet in person. The reason for the inability to meet must be set
out in the affidavit.

When swearing an affidavit by video-conference:

  * The Commissioner for Oaths or practising solicitor must have a copy of the affidavit itself, any documents being attached to it (exhibits), and an identification document for the witness 
  * Both the witness and the Commissioner for Oaths or practising solicitor must be able to see and hear one another 
  * The Commissioner for Oaths or practising solicitor must confirm that an appropriate religious text is available to the witness 
  * The witness must go through every page to be included in the affidavit and make the necessary oath 
  * The _jurat_ will state that the affidavit was made by video-conference 

The affidavit is then sent to the Commissioner for Oaths or practising
solicitor who confirms compliance and countersigns the affidavit.

When swearing an affidavit in person or by video-conference, the steps
involved should be explained to you by the Commissioner for Oaths or
practising solicitor.

##  Affidavit fees

You need to pay a fee to lodge an affidavit with the relevant court office.

The fees are:

  * €15 for the District Court and Circuit Court 
  * €20 for the High Court and Supreme Court 

Your solicitor and barrister will also charge fees for their services as may
the solicitor or Commissioner for Oaths who verifies the affidavit.

##  Further information

You should get [ legal advice
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/#31724a)
for more detailed information.

_**Page edited:** 10 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Affidavits&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Affidavits&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/affidavit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax on income that is not from your employer_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-return-non-paye-income/)

Some PAYE taxpayers have other sources of income. Information about how non-
PAYE income is taxed.

882.38354

  * [ _Evidence that has been collected unlawfully_ ](/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-evidence/)

Evidence that has been collected in deliberate and conscious breach of your
constitutional rights cannot be admitted in courts in Ireland.

847.73

  * [ _Trust funds for people that are permanently incapacitated_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/trust-funds-for-permanently-incapacitated-people/)

Trust funds that benefit people who are permanently incapacitated may be
exempt from income tax. Find out about these trust funds and the rules that
apply.

808.911

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

