**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Types of sentences

#  Types of sentences

  * Introduction 
  * Imprisonment 
  * Non-custodial sentences 
  * Sex and drug trafficking offenders 
  * Minimum sentences for firearm offences 

##  Introduction

There is a wide range of sentences available to a judge who is [ sentencing
someone found guilty of a criminal offence ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sentence/) in Ireland. These sentences include:

####  Custodial sentences

  * Imprisonment 

####  Non-custodial sentences

  * Suspended sentences 
  * Community service orders 
  * Fines 
  * Curfew and exclusion orders 
  * Restriction on movement orders 
  * Probation orders 
  * Binding over 
  * The poor box 
  * Forfeiture and confiscation 
  * Compensation 
  * Disqualification 
  * Endorsement and [ penalty points for road traffic offences ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/penalty-points-for-driving-offences/)
  * Orders for sex offenders 
  * Orders for drug traffickers 

##  Imprisonment

There are three specific types of imprisonment options available to a judge:

  * Mandatory sentences 
  * Maximum sentences 
  * Minimum sentences 

###  Mandatory sentences

A mandatory sentence is one which must be imposed regardless of any other
circumstances. In Ireland, murder carries a **mandatory** sentence of life
imprisonment. A life sentence lasts for life. However, as is the case in a
number of countries, not all of the life sentence in Ireland is generally
served in prison custody. Prisoners who have been sentenced to life
imprisonment are often granted temporary or early release. This is a feature
of prison systems internationally and in Ireland.

The [ Minister for Justice
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/Our_ministers) always considers the
advice and recommendations of the [ Parole Board ](/en/justice/prison-
system/being-released-from-prison/) . From 30 July 2021, the time which must
be served by a life-sentence prisoner before being considered for parole by
the Board is 12 years. Previously it was 7 years.

Prisoners serving very long sentences (including life sentences), are normally
reviewed on a number of occasions over a number of years before any
substantial concessions would be recommended by the Board. The length of time
spent in custody by offenders serving life sentences can vary substantially.
Of the prisoners serving life sentences who have been released, the average
sentence served in prison is approximately 18 years. This, however, is only an
average; there are prisoners serving life sentences in Ireland who have spent
more than thirty years in custody.

###  Maximum sentences

The law lays down maximum sentences for all crimes. For example, if you are
found guilty of violent disorder under [ Section 15 of the Criminal Justice
(Public Order) Act 1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/sec0015.html#zza2y1994s15)
, the maximum sentence you can receive is 10 years imprisonment.

In practice maximum sentences are reserved for only the most serious cases.
The maximum sentence is always open to a judge even if you have pleaded guilty
to an offence.

###  Minimum sentences

Generally, sentencing is left to the discretion of the judge. However, there
are a number of laws which take this discretion away from the judge and they
must impose **at least** a minimum sentence.

For example, the [ Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/26/enacted/en/print) sets out a
number offences in relation to firearms which carry a minimum sentence if you
are [ convicted on indictment ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/criminal-trial/) . If it is your first offence, the judge has the
discretion to impose a lesser sentence. In these cases the judge will take
certain things into account, such as if you plead guilty or assisted the
Gardaí. However, if it is your second or subsequent firearms offence, then the
minimum sentence applies.

See information on ‘Minimum sentences for firearm offences’ below.

##  Non-custodial sentences

###  Suspended sentences

A suspended sentence means the judge imposes a prison sentence but suspends it
on certain conditions. This means that you do not go to prison if you keep the
conditions. A suspended sentence contains 3 elements:

  * The term of imprisonment (for example, 4 years) 
  * The conditions on which it is suspended (for example, to keep the peace and be of good behaviour or to undergo certain treatment) 
  * The period for which the sentence is suspended 

If you break a condition when the sentence is suspended, you will have to
serve the prison term that was originally imposed.

###  Community service orders

Community service orders (CSOs) are provided for by the [ Criminal Justice
(Community Service) Act 1983
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1983/en/act/pub/0023/index.html) as amended
by the Criminal Justice (Community Service) (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 2011. A
CSO means that the person must do some work which is beneficial to the
community. CSOs are imposed by a judge instead of a prison sentence, where the
prison sentence would have been 12 months or less. A CSO can be made if you
are over 16.

A number of considerations must be met before a CSO can be made by a judge:

  * You must be suitable for community service (the judge orders a [ probation report ](/en/justice/probation-and-welfare-services/probation-service/) to decide whether you are suitable for a CSO) 
  * Suitable community work must be available for you to do 
  * You must agree to the CSO 

The amount of community service you get depends on the Court, but it cannot
exceed 240 hours. You must complete the community service within one year of
when the CSO was made.

###  Fines

Many offences provide for a fine to be imposed. Often, offences will provide
for a fine and/or another punishment (usually a prison sentence), while other
offences attract only a fine. If a fine exceeds a certain amount ( [ class A
fine ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/) )
the offence may be outside the jurisdiction of the [ District Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) which can only deal with minor
offences.

When a fine is imposed, the judge normally specifies when the fine must be
paid by. If the fine is not paid within the time period provided by the judge,
you can be sent to prison. In the District Court, the imprisonment default
periods are:

**Default periods in prison for not paying fines** **Amount of Fine** |  **Imprisonment in default**  
---|---  
Less than €500  |  5 days   
Between €500 and €1,500  |  10 days   
Between €1,500 and €3,000  |  20 days   
Greater than €3,000  |  30 days   
  
Under the [ Fines (Payment and Recovery) Act 2014
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2014/act/7/enacted/en/html) judges can
give you community service instead of sending you to prison for failing to pay
a fine.

###  Curfews and exclusion orders

Judges sometimes use curfews and/or exclusion orders as a sentencing option.
These orders are often used as a condition of bail or a suspended sentence.

The court can make an order that means you have to be at home at a particular
address between certain hours of the day or night. Similarly, the judge might
ban you from a certain street or premises, for example, a pub or licensed
premises.

###  Restriction on movement orders

Under the Criminal Justice Act 2006 the court can impose [ restriction on
movement orders ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/restriction-on-movement-orders/)
. These orders restrict your movements as the court considers appropriate. For
example, they can forbid you from being in a certain place at a certain time,
or can involve a curfew.

A restriction on movement order may be imposed if you are convicted of certain
offences (mainly public order and assault offences) and you are sentenced to
imprisonment for three months or more. The Act also provides that compliance
with such orders may be electronically monitored.

###  Probation orders

The [ Probation of Offenders Act 1907
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1907/act/17/enacted/en/html) provides the
courts with a way of dealing with first-time offenders and offenders who are
unlikely to be in trouble again. It lets the courts give these offenders a
type of official warning without imposing a sentence on them. A probation
order requires you to be of good behaviour. It may also contain certain
conditions such as:

  * Payment of compensation 
  * Residing at a particular place 
  * Supervision 
  * Any other conditions considered necessary to prevent a repeat of the offence (for example, attending counselling) 

It will be recorded that you have benefited from the Probation Act. If you
appear before the courts again this may be taken into consideration.

###  Binding over

Courts have a long-standing power that allows them to bind you over to keep
the peace and be of good behaviour. This involves you entering into a
recognisance (or monetary bond) for a period of time. If you get into trouble
during the time stated in the order, you must pay that sum of money or face
imprisonment.

###  Court poor box

The court poor box is another way judges can deal with less serious offences
in the District Court. If you agree, you may be required to pay a sum of money
into the court poor box. Usually this is as an alternative to having a
conviction recorded against you. Judges only really consider this option if
you are a first-time offender who has committed a minor offence, such as,
littering or parking offences. This option is only available if you plead
guilty or where there are special circumstances explaining your behaviour.
There is more information in the [ document on the Court poor box
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/) .

###  Forfeiture and confiscation

Various laws provide judges with the power to order property, which is
connected with the offence you have been convicted of, to be forfeited or
confiscated. For example, under [ Section 10 of the Censorship of Publications
Act 1929
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1929/en/act/pub/0021/sec0010.html#zza21y1929s10)
prohibited publications may be confiscated.

###  Compensation

The [ Criminal Justice Act 1993
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1993/en/act/pub/0006/index.html) means judges
can order you to pay compensation. This may be in addition to or instead of
any other punishment. The amount of compensation which a court can order is
limited to the amount it could award in damages in a civil case.

**Court compensation limits** **Court** |  **Maximum Compensation**  
---|---  
District Court  |  €15,000   
Circuit Court  |  €75,000   
  
The court must take your means and your financial commitments into account
when making a compensation order. Compensation orders may be enforced. For
example, the court can order an attachment of earnings.

###  Disqualification

Disqualification orders are not a punishment, but rather a finding that a
person is unfit to perform the function from which they are disqualified, for
example, to drive a car. In some cases disqualification is mandatory, and in
others cases disqualification is something the court chooses to impose.

The most common types of disqualifications are for convictions for driving
offences. However, under [ Chapter 4 of the Companies Act 2014
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2014/act/38/enacted/en/print) , a person,
convicted on indictment of a criminal offence related to a company, can be
disqualified from holding certain positions related to running a company, such
as a director.

###  Endorsements and penalty points

The Road Traffic Acts provide for a system of endorsements. An endorsement is
an entry on a person’s licence record of either a court order of
disqualification or of penalty points. There is more information in the [
document on penalty points ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-
offences/penalty-points-for-driving-offences/) .

##  Sex and drug trafficking offenders

###  Orders for sex offenders

As well as the general sentencing options available for all offences, a judge
can make a number of specific orders when dealing with sexual offences. This
is provided for by the [ Sex Offenders Act 2001
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2001/act/18/enacted/en/html) .

A judge can make the following orders if you are a convicted sex offender:

**Notification order** : Obliges you to notify the Gardaí of your name and
address.

**Certificate** : States that you have been convicted of the sexual offence,
your sentence and that there is a notification requirement.

**Obligation to notify employers** : If you are applying for employment which
involves unsupervised access to or contact with a child or mentally impaired
person, you are ordered to notify the employer or potential employer of your
conviction for sex offences.

**Sex offender order** : If the Court believes it is necessary to protect the
public from you, it can make such an order prohibiting you from carrying out
certain activities.

**Post-release supervision order** : If the Court considers it necessary it
can impose conditions on you for when you are released from prison. These
conditions will be supervised by the Probation Service and the Gardaí.

There is more information in the documents on the [ Sex Offenders Register
](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/) and on [
monitoring of sex offenders ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-
offenders-register/) .

###  Orders for drug trafficking offenders

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 introduced a system for convicted drug
traffickers similar to those mentioned for sex offenders. The court can make
an order which obliges you to notify the Gardaí of your name and address.

The order is only made if the court considers that it is in the interest of
the common good and that it is appropriate, given the circumstances of your
case. More information is available in the [ document on the Drug Offenders
Register ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/drug-offenders-register/) .

##  Minimum sentences for firearm offences

Mandatory minimum sentences apply to certain firearm offences. However,
discretion is available to the judge for a first offence. The firearm offences
that mandatory minimum sentencing applies to include:

  * **Possession of a firearm with intent to endanger life** : minimum of 10 years imprisonment 
  * **Possession of a firearm while taking a vehicle without authority** : minimum of 5 years imprisonment 
  * **Use of a firearm to assist or aid escape:** minimum of 10 years imprisonment 
  * **Possession of a firearm or ammunition in suspicious circumstances** : minimum of 5 years imprisonment 
  * **Carrying a firearm with criminal intent:** minimum of 5 years imprisonment 
  * **Shortening the barrel of a shotgun or rifle:** minimum of 5 years imprisonment 

_**Page edited:** 24 August 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Types%20of%20sentences&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Types%20of%20sentences&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/types-of-sentences/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Types of cancer services_ ](/en/health/health-services/cancer-services/cancer-services/)

Health services and supports available to people who are living with cancer.

1254.9503

  * [ _Types of witnesses_ ](/en/justice/witnesses/types-of-witnesses/)

Page describing the different types of witnesses that can be called in a court
of law in Ireland.

1247.271

  * [ _Types of insurance_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/insurance/insurance/)

An overview of the different types of insurance available and where to get
more information.

1190.7853

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

