**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Sentencing at criminal trials in Ireland

#  Sentencing at criminal trials in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Sentencing 
  * Aggravating and mitigating factors 
  * Types of sentences 

##  Introduction

If a court in Ireland has found you guilty of an offence, or you have pleaded
guilty, the judge will then decide what sentence you will be given. It is the
judge’s function to pass a sentence that is lawful.

##  Sentencing

###  Who decides the sentence?

In Ireland it is always a judge (or a panel of judges in the case of the [
Special Criminal Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/special-criminal-court/) or
the [ Court of Appeal ](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/) ) who
decides the sentence. In a jury trial the jury’s role is to decide whether you
are guilty or not guilty. They have no role in sentencing you.

###  How does a judge decide on a sentence?

The judge goes through 2 steps when considering what sentence to impose on
you:

  1. They decide what the sentence should be, based on the seriousness of the offence. 
  2. They then reduce that sentence, taking into account any mitigating or excusing factors given on your behalf. 

What your [ sentence ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/types-of-
sentences/) will be depends on the offence you committed. Some offences can
only be punished with a fine, meaning there is no option to impose
imprisonment or community service.

There are minimum and maximum sentences for some offences, and the judge must
impose these. For example, for some road traffic offences, the judge must
disqualify offenders from driving for a minimum of two years.

There are mandatory sentences for some offences. For example, if a court finds
you guilty of murder, the judge has to impose a sentence of life imprisonment.

Under the [ Probation of Offenders Act 1907
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1907/act/17/enacted/en/html) , a judge in
the [ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) may decide
not to convict you, even if it has been proven that you are guilty. The charge
may be dismissed or you may be conditionally discharged. The judge has the
option to do this this if they believe you are unlikely to reoffend.

You can read [ sentencing guidelines
](https://judicialcouncil.ie/assets/uploads/Sentence Information the General
Public.pdf) which have been set out by the Superior Courts for some offences.

###  Sentencing of children

The information given in this document relates to offences committed by
adults. Children (people aged under 18) can be charged and penalised in the
same way but there are other considerations which must be taken into account.
Children between the ages of 10 and 17 who are sentenced to a period of
detention are sent to the [ Oberstown Children Detention Campus
](https://www.oberstown.com/) . The prosecution of children is governed by the
[ Children Act 2001
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2001/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) .You can
read more in the document [ Children and the criminal justice system
](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-
system-in-ireland/) .

##  Aggravating and mitigating factors

The judge must consider aggravating and mitigating factors when sentencing
you, unless your offence has a mandatory sentence. Your solicitor or barrister
will urge the judge to consider these factors on your behalf.

  * Aggravating factors may stop the sentence from being reduced 
  * Mitigating factors may lead to the sentence being reduced. 

###  Facts about how the offence was committed

Circumstances that may be mitigating factors include:

  * You were provoked into committing the offence 
  * You were under emotional stress or pressure 
  * It was an accident or mistake 
  * Goods stolen or damaged were of low value 
  * Stolen property was recovered 

Circumstances that may be aggravating factors include:

  * You used a weapon or violence 
  * You invaded someone’s home 
  * Breach of trust 
  * You were on bail for another offence at the time 
  * Goods stolen or damaged were of high value 
  * Stolen property was not recovered 

###  Impact of the offence on the victim

The judge will ask that a victim impact report is prepared in most cases of a
serious nature. In some cases a judge hears direct evidence from the victim
through a [ victim impact statement ](https://www.dppireland.ie/victims-
witnesses/making-a-victim-impact-statement/) . This has a bearing on the
sentence.

###  The offender’s reaction to committing the offence

You can expect a reduced sentence for pleading guilty. A guilty plea will save
the court time and can be seen as a sign of remorse. In sex cases or cases
involving violence, a guilty plea will spare the victim the trauma of having
to relive the events in court.

While a guilty plea may lead to a lighter sentence you will not be given a
harsher sentence because you pleaded not guilty. There is a constitutional
right to be tried and you cannot be penalised for exercising this right.

###  Early admission of guilt

The court sees an early admission of guilt to the Gardaí as a mitigating
factor as it saves the Gardaí time and resources.

###  Co-operation with the Gardaí

Co-operation with the Gardaí also helps you in the sentencing process,
especially if it helped the Gardaí in catching other offenders. For example, [
Section 27 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1999/en/act/pub/0010/sec0005.html) provides
that this is taken into account when deciding whether the minimum 10 year
sentence for possession of drugs over a certain value is just and appropriate.

###  Personal circumstances of the offender

Your personal circumstances is one of the most important factors a judge
considers before sentencing and they may request a probation report. In
considering your personal circumstances the judge takes the following into
account:

  * Drug addiction 
  * Age 
  * Disability or illness 
  * Family circumstances 
  * Other penalties as a result of conviction (for example, losing your job) 
  * Previous convictions 
  * Character (evidence may be given of your previous good character) 

**Character references** **after convictions for sexual offences**

From 31 August 2024, if you are convicted of a sexual offence and are being
sentenced there are different rules. The person giving the character reference
about you must be under oath or give the character reference by affidavit.
This means that the person giving the character reference can be [ cross-
examined in court ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/criminal-trial/) .

##  Types of sentences

There is a wide range of sentences available that judges can impose on someone
found guilty of an offence. You can read about different sentences in the
document on [ types of sentences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/types-of-sentences/) .

_**Page edited:** 20 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sentence/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Sentencing%20at%20criminal%20trials%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sentence/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sentence/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Sentencing%20at%20criminal%20trials%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/sentence/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001–2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

1345.1866

  * [ _The law on defamation in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/law-on-defamation/)

You can take legal action against a person or corporation who makes a
‘defamatory statement’ to another person.

1293.8939

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1279.5654

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

