**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal offences ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/) > Owning and using a firearm in Ireland

#  Owning and using a firearm in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Is it legal to own a firearm in Ireland? 
  * How to apply for a firearm certificate 
  * Keeping a firearm safely in Ireland 
  * What types of firearms can be licensed? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you own or want to own a firearm in Ireland, you must have a firearm
certificate.

The most common type of firearm is a gun. However, the following are
considered firearms under Irish law and also need a licence:

  * Crossbows 
  * Spearguns 
  * All airguns with a muzzle velocity (speed) of over 1 joule (including paintball markers) 

An [ Garda Síochána ](http://www.garda.ie/) grant firearm certificates and
they are responsible for supervising firearm use. If you want to make a
complaint or raise a concern about the use of firearms, you should contact the
Gardaí. In an emergency always call 999 or 112.

The law relating to firearms is mainly contained in the [ Firearms Act 1925
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1925/act/17/enacted/en/html) .

##  Is it legal to own a firearm in Ireland?

Yes, it is legal to own a firearm in Ireland if you:

  * Are over 16 years of age 
  * Have a license known as a firearm certificate for that firearm 
  * Are living in Ireland for at least 6 months (unless you are temporarily resident here) 
  * Are competent to use a firearm (see below) 
  * Keep your firearm securely 
  * Are not disqualified from having a firearm, for example, if you are deemed to be of unsound mind or have been sentenced to imprisonment for a firearms or terrorist offence 

###  **What can I use a** **firearm for in Ireland?**

You can use a firearm for:

  * Recreational purposes such as target shooting or hunting 
  * Killing pests or for the humane killing of animals 

If you are using any firearm, you must use in line with any conditions
attached to a firearm certificate. It can be a criminal offence if you fail to
do this.

**Firearm use in films and theatre**

A firearm certificate may be needed if you are using a firearm in a theatrical
production or the shooting of a film or TV show.

**Hunting in Ireland**

If you are planning to hunt deer, you also need a separate [ deer hunting
licence ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-
and-leisure/deer-licences/) .

###  **Firearm certificates**

It is a criminal offence to possess or use a firearm without a relevant
firearm certificate.

You do not need a firearms certificate if you fall into an exempted category,
for example, if you:

  * Use a firearm in the course of duty as a member of the Defence Forces or An Garda Síochána 
  * Use a firearm for certain sporting purposes 
  * Are a registered firearms dealer 

A firearm certificate lasts for 3 years.

###  **Firearm** **training certificate**

From the age of 14, you can apply for a [ firearm training certificate (pdf)
](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-services/firearms-
licensing/fca1_firearm_certificate_application-copy.pdf) . If you only have a
firearm training certificate, you cannot own a gun.

With a firearm training certificate, however, you can use a non-restricted
firearm when hunting or target shooting if:

  * You are being supervised by someone over 18 years 
  * This supervisor holds a firearm certificate for that specific firearm 

You can only do target shooting with your firearms training certificate at an
authorised shooting range or at an authorised shooting rifle or pistol club.

If you fail to use a firearm in line with a firearms training certificate,
your certificate could be withdrawn and/or you could be charged with a
criminal offence.

##  How to apply for a firearm certificate

If you meet the criteria above, you can apply for a firearm certificate. Each
application is assessed on a case-by-case basis.

If you inherit a firearm, you should also apply for a certificate.

If you are substituting one firearm for another one you also use a [ FCA1
application form (pdf) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-
services/firearms-licensing/fca1_firearm_certificate_application-copy.pdf) [ .
](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-services/firearms-
licensing/fca1_firearm_certificate_application-copy.pdf)

###  **Step 1: Fill in your details for the FCA1 form**

If you are making a new application for a firearm certificate or a firearm
training certificate, fill in a [ FCA1 firearm certificate application form
(pdf) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-services/firearms-
licensing/fca1_firearm_certificate_application-copy.pdf) . You must include:

  * Your personal details 
  * A passport-sized photograph 
  * Proof of your identity 
  * Your doctor’s contact details and information about any conditions that may affect your ability to use firearms safely 
  * Contact details for 2 character referees 
  * Your past criminal and firearms history 
  * Written consent from your parent or guardian (only if you are aged under 16) 

###  **Step 2: Fill in details about the firearm**

  * Where you got it 
  * How you plan to securely store the firearm (Read more below about safely storing a firearm) 
  * Why you need it (personal safety or the protection of property is not considered an acceptable reason for wanting a firearm certificate) 
  * Your competence to use a firearm 

###  **How do I prove I am competent to use a firearm?**

If it is your first time applying for a firearm certificate, you must show you
are competent to use a firearm. You can prove this by:

  * Attending a firearms training course 
  * Joining an authorised rifle or pistol club or range 

[ An Garda Síochána ](https://control.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
enforcement/garda-siochana-national-police-force/) may ask for more
information or clarification before issuing your certificate.

###  **Step 3: Submit your FCA1 form to the Gardaí**

Send your completed form to your [ local garda station
](https://www.garda.ie/en/contact-us/station-directory/) , and a chief
superintendent or a superintendent will decide on your application.

If you are seeking a certificate for a restricted firearm, you must send the
application form to a chief superintendent nominated by the Garda
Commissioner. You must include a reason why a non-restricted firearm would not
serve your purpose for a firearm.

If your firearm certificate is granted, you may have to meet certain
conditions. This can include the amount of ammunition you can hold at any one
time or whether the firearm can be loaded when you transport it.

You then have to pay a fee to issue your firearm certificate. Your grant
notice letter will outline the fee.

###  **Paying for a firearm certificate**

A firearm certificate costs €80 for 3 years for any type of firearm.

A firearm training certificate costs €40 for 3 years.

A firearm certificate for a person who is non-resident in Ireland costs €40
for 1 year.

You can pay for all firearms certificate fees through An Post.

###  **Applying for a firearms certificate if you are visiting Ireland**

If you are over 16 and not living in Ireland (not ordinarily resident) you can
get a 1-year non-resident firearms certificate. This will allow you legally to
own and use a firearm in Ireland for 12 months from the date you are granted
the firearms certificate. You must apply at least 6 weeks before your arrival.

You apply by filling in a [ Firearm Certificate Application (non-resident)
application form (pdf) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-
services/firearms-licensing/non-resident-form-amended-16-1-13.pdf) available
on the website of the Irish police force (An Garda Síochána).

You need to include:

  * Your personal information 
  * Details of your firearm 
  * Your travel details 
  * Location of and type of shooting you are planning 

You send your application to the [ Garda Superintendent of the district
](https://www.garda.ie/en/contact-us/station-directory/) where you plan to
first use the firearm along with:

  * A €40 application fee 
  * Your valid membership card of any Irish gun club, game association, and so on, (if you have a membership) 
  * A European Firearms Pass (EFP) (for residents of EU member states) 
  * Any other permit, licence or authorisation (if you are from another state) 

If you are applying to use a restricted firearm, your application will be sent
to the Garda chief superintendent of that division.

###  **Firearm certificate refusal**

You may be refused a firearm certificate if:

  * Your application does not establish a good reason for having one 
  * You are considered to be a danger to public safety or security 
  * You cannot show that you will keep the firearm securely 

If your firearm certificate is refused, the Gardaí will give you the reasons.
You can appeal a firearm certificate refusal to the District Court.

You can read [ frequently asked questions about firearm certificate
application refusals (pdf) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-
services/firearms-licensing/faq-s-firearms-application-refusals.pdf) .

##  Keeping a firearm safely in Ireland

###  **Safely storing a firearm**

If you have or use firearms, you must meet the detailed requirements [ set out
in legislation ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2009/si/307/made/en) for
storing them safely.

This storage depends on the type and number of firearms you hold. The usual
requirements are that firearms are stored within structurally solid buildings
or in purpose-built cabinets or gun rooms.

You should never store guns in easy-to-access locations or in unattended
vehicles.

When you apply for a firearm certificate, a member of An Garda Síochána may
inspect your proposed secure place of storage.

###  Renewing your firearm certificate

When your firearm certificate is about to expire (after 3 years), you should
get a copy of a firearm renewal form from the Gardaí. This will usually
contain your details and the existing details of the firearm. You can amend
the form if there are any changes to these details or if any information is
incorrect. You must then send the completed form to your local garda station.

If you do not get a firearm renewal form, you should contact your local garda
station to avoid holding an unlicensed firearm.

If everything is in order, you get a grant notice letter. This confirms that
your firearm certificate will be renewed for another 3 years once you pay the
fee.

###  **Can my firearm certificate be revoked?**

Your firearms certificate can be revoked or withdrawn if you:

  * Do not have a good reason for having the firearm 
  * Are or become a disqualified person 
  * Are considered to be a danger to public safety or security 
  * Breach the conditions in the firearm certificate 
  * Do not supervise the holder of a firearm training certificate when using the firearm. 

If your firearm certificate is revoked (cancelled), you will be asked to hand
your firearm and any ammunition over to the Gardaí and you will be given the
option to sell it.

You can appeal a revocation of a firearm certificate to the [ District Court
](https://control.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/district-
court/) .

##  What types of firearms can be licensed?

The most common type of firearm is a gun. However, crossbows, spearguns and
all airguns with a firing velocity (speed) of over 1 joule (including
paintball markers) are also considered firearms under Irish law and must have
a firearm certificate.

###  **Restricted or non-restricted firearms**

There are 2 different categories of firearms in Ireland – _restricted_ and
_non-restricted_ .

A non-restricted firearm is a small calibre firearm that can hold no more than
5 rounds.

Additional restrictions are placed on owning and using restricted firearms
because they are considered particularly dangerous.

You can check if your firearm is restricted or listed as non-restricted under
the [ Firearms (Restricted Firearms and Ammunition) Order 2008
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2008/si/21/made/en/print) as [ amended
in 2009. ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2009/si/337/made/en/print)

###  **Imitation (fake) firearms**

A realistic imitation (fake) firearm looks like a firearm but does not have
the necessary firing ability to be considered a firearm, for example,
paintball guns may be in this category.

If you have a realistic imitation firearm in a public place without lawful
authority or reasonable excuse, it is also a criminal offence.

###  **Deactivated firearms**

A deactivated firearm is not capable of being fired. There are certain
regulations you must follow for a firearm to be considered deactivated,
including:

  * Complying with minimum standards 
  * An accompanying certificate from an appropriate authority 
  * The firearm being appropriately marked 

If the firearm was deactivated before 8 April 2016, less strict requirements
apply.

Once deactivated, you can seek an authorisation to keep the firearm.

###  **Antique firearms**

You do not need a firearm certificate for antique firearms if you are holding
them as ornaments or curiosities.

Modern reproductions of antique firearms are not exempt from needing a firearm
certificate.

###  **Lost or found firearms**

If you find or lose a firearm, you should immediately report this to An Garda
Síochána.

##  Further information

The Firearms Unit in the Department of Justice has responsibility for the
development of legislation and policy related to firearms. You can [ read more
on gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-information/b2289-firearms/) .

You can read the [ guidelines on owning and using a firearm, published by the
Commissioner of An Garda Síochána ](https://www.garda.ie/en/information-
centre/freedom-of-information/freedom-of-information/the-garda-
commissioner%E2%80%99s-guidelines-as-to-the-practical-application-and-
operation-of-the-firearms-acts-1925-2009-amended-12-11-14-.pdf) .

_**Page edited:** 16 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/firearms-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Owning%20and%20using%20a%20firearm%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/firearms-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/firearms-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Owning%20and%20using%20a%20firearm%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/firearms-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Owning and operating drones in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/owning-and-operating-a-drone/)

If you want to fly a drone, you must register as a drone operator in most
cases. This page has information on how to do this and the rules for flying
drones.

1886.9457

  * [ _Applying for international protection in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/applying-for-refugee-status-in-ireland/)

Rules and processes involved in applying for international protection in
Ireland.

1723.839

  * [ _How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-in-ireland/)

Outlines the services and online tools available to get recognition for your
foreign qualification in Ireland. Also explains how the National Framework of
Qualifications can help you compare and contrast different qualifications.

1653.1312

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

