**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Crime and
crime prevention ](/en/justice/crime-and-crime-prevention/) > Human
trafficking

#  Human trafficking

  * Introduction 
  * What is human trafficking? 
  * Reporting suspicions of trafficking 
  * Support for victims of human trafficking 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Human trafficking is the transporting of people for exploitation. Victims are
trafficked into various types of work, including farm work, domestic work and
forced prostitution. They may be subjected to sexual abuse and other forms of
violence.

If you consider yourself or somebody else to be a victim of human trafficking,
you should [ report your concerns ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/reporting-a-
crime/) to the [ Garda Síochána ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-siochana-
national-police-force/) (Irish police force). In an emergency, you should call
999 or 112.

You can also get help from the Health Service Executive’s (HSE) [ Anti-Human
Trafficking Team ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/) , or
any of the organisations listed in the section titled, ‘Support for victims of
human trafficking’ below.

##  What is human trafficking?

Human trafficking involves the use of deception, threats or physical force to
move a victim from one place to another in order to exploit them. In the case
of children, no force is required - the very act of transporting a child into
exploitative conditions constitutes trafficking.

Exploitation is a definitive element of human trafficking and distinguishes it
from immigration-related offenses such as ‘people smuggling’, for example,
where a migrant pays a third-party (a ‘smuggler’) to facilitate their illegal
entry into the state. You can read more about the relation between [ human
trafficking and people smuggling ](https://www.garda.ie/en/crime/human-
trafficking/what-s-the-difference-between-trafficking-and-smuggling-.html) on
Garda.ie.

Exploitation can take many forms, but includes:

  * **Sexual exploitation** , such as the prostitution of the victim or the production of pornography depicting the victim 
  * **Labour exploitation** , such as forcing the victim to perform manual labour, carry out domestic services, or participate in criminality or begging 
  * **Organ removal** , performed without the free, informed and specific consent of the donor 

You can read more about the different types of human trafficking, including
warning signs that can help you to identify victims, on the Government’s anti-
human trafficking website, [ blueblindfold.ie ](https://www.blueblindfold.ie/)
.

###  The law on human trafficking

The [ Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) Act 2008
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2008/act/8/enacted/en/html) and the [
Criminal Law (Human Trafficking) (Amendment) Act 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2013/act/24/enacted/en/html?q=Criminal+Law+Human+Trafficking+Amendment+Act+2013+)
make it an offence to traffic in adults or children for the purpose of their
sexual or labour exploitation, forced criminality, forced begging or the
removal of their organs.

It is also an offence to sell or purchase (or offer to sell or purchase) any
person for any purpose. The [ Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Act 2017
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2017/act/2/enacted/en/html?q=Criminal+Law+Sexual+Offences+Act+2017)
criminalises the purchase of sexual services and the soliciting or purchasing
of sex from a trafficked person.

Read more about the [ law on selling or buying sex ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-sex/) .

##  Reporting suspicions of trafficking

If you consider yourself, or someone you know, to be a victim of human
trafficking, you should [ report your concerns to the Garda Síochána
](/en/justice/law-enforcement/reporting-a-crime/) (Irish police force). In an
emergency, you should call **999** or **112** .

If you wish to report suspicions of human trafficking confidentially you can
call:

  * The Garda Confidential Line on 1800 666 111, or 
  * Crimestoppers on 1800 250 025 

You can also email suspicions or concerns to [ blueblindfold@garda.ie
](mailto:blueblindfold@garda.ie) .

Find out more about how to [ know the signs of human trafficking
](https://www.blueblindfold.ie/) .

The Garda Síochána operate a special department dedicated to investigating
allegations of human trafficking and supporting victims called the Human
Trafficking Investigation and Co-ordination Unit (HTICU). You can read more
about Garda action in relation to human trafficking and the work of the HTICU
[ on the Garda Síochana website ](https://www.garda.ie/en/crime/human-
trafficking/) .

###  Asylum for victims of human trafficking

As a potential victim of trafficking, **you will not be deported or removed
from Ireland** while the Superintendent in the [ Garda National Immigration
Bureau (GNIB) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/organised-serious-
crime/immigration-gnib-/) decides if there are reasonable grounds to believe
you are a suspected victim of trafficking.

If you are identified as a potential victim of human trafficking, you can get
[ free legal advice ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-
services/common-legal-problems/human-trafficking/) from the [ Legal Aid Board
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/) . In the event you [
apply for asylum in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving_country/asylum_seekers_and_refugees/the_asylum_process_in_ireland/)
, the Legal Aid Board can provide [ legal representation
](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-services/services-
for-international-protection-applicants/) in relation to your application.
Find out more about [ legal aid for asylum seekers ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-
ireland/legal-aid-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/) .

You can [ read more about the immigration rules (pdf)
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Administrative-
Immigration-Arrangements-for-the-Protection-of-Victims-of-Human-Trafficking-
March-2011-1.pdf) that apply to victims of human trafficking in Ireland. The
Department of Justice has also [ published detailed guidance (pdf)
](https://www.blueblindfold.ie/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Guide-to-Procedures-
June-2015.pdf) on the steps involved in applying for immigration permission as
a non-EEA citizen or asylum seeker who is a victim of human trafficking.

###  National Referral Mechanism

On 11 May 2021, the Government approved plans for a [ revised National
Referral Mechanism (NRM) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/27823-government-approves-proposal-for-a-revised-national-referral-
mechanism-to-make-it-easier-for-human-trafficking-victims-to-come-forward-and-
receive-supports/) that is intended to make it easier for victims of human
trafficking to get support from state and civil society organisations.

Under the new scheme, several state and non-governmental organisations are to
join with An Garda Síochána in identifying victims of human trafficking and
providing them with access to the range of support services available through
the NRM.

These changes are set out in the [ Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Human
Trafficking) Bill 2023 ](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2023/62/)
which is expected to become law in 2024.

You can read more about these changes in the Department of Justice’s [
National Action Plan to prevent and combat Human Trafficking 2023-2027 (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/275645/a08d95b1-9701-41a3-87f6-5424625ad325.pdf#page=null)
.

##  Support for victims of human trafficking

If you are a victim of human trafficking, there are a range of Government and
voluntary organisations available to support you on issues such as
accommodation, medical care, childcare and asylum.

The Irish Government operates several services that support trafficking
victims in need of:

  * **Accommodation** – through the [ International Protection Accommodation Service ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/d9f43-international-protection-accommodation-services-ipas/) , or [ Tusla ](https://www.tusla.ie/) in the case of children 
  * **Health and psychological services** – through the [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/) , or [ Tusla ](https://www.tusla.ie/) in the case of children 
  * **Legal advice** – through the [ Legal Aid Board ](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-services/common-legal-problems/human-trafficking/)
  * **Sexual health clinics** \- through the [ HSE list of sexual health clinics in Ireland ](https://www.sexualwellbeing.ie/sexual-health/hse-sti-services-in-ireland.html)
  * **Anti-human trafficking support** – through the [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/) contact details below 
  * **HSE Women’s Health Service** – The Dublin 8 clinic times are Monday 2pm to 4pm and Thursday 1.30pm to 3.30pm. To make an appointment or to refer to the service, please call 01 795 8280 or text WhatsApp to 087 330 2584. You can request an interpreter when you book an appointment. 

A range of community and voluntary organisations are available to support
trafficking victims. For general guidance or advice, you can contact:

  * [ Migrant Rights Centre Ireland ](https://www.mrci.ie/)
  * [ Immigrant Council of Ireland ](https://www.immigrantcouncil.ie/)
  * [ Doras ](https://doras.org/)
  * [ MECPATHS ](https://mecpaths.com/)
  * [ Act to Prevent Trafficking (APT) ](https://www.aptireland.org/)
  * [ Cork Against Human Trafficking ](https://www.corkagainsthumantrafficking.ie/)

If you are a victim of sexual violence or sexual exploitation, the following
organisations are available to provide you with specialist support:

  * [ Rape Crisis Network Ireland ](https://www.rcni.ie/)
  * [ Ruhama ](https://www.ruhama.ie/)
  * [ Dublin Rape Crisis Centre ](https://www.drcc.ie/)
  * [ Sexual Violence Centre Cork ](https://www.sexualviolence.ie/)

International organisations can also provide information on your rights as a
victim of trafficking and other services including, if you wish, assisting
with voluntary return home:

  * [ International Organisation for Migration ](https://ireland.iom.int/)
  * [ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ](https://www.unhcr.org/)

You can read more information about [ services available to support victims of
crime ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/support-services-for-victims-of-crime/) .

##  Further information

###  Anti Human Trafficking Unit

Department of Justice

51 St Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ https://www.blueblindfold.ie/ ](https://www.blueblindfold.ie/)

**Email:** [ blueblindfold@garda.ie ](mailto:blueblindfold@garda.ie)

###  HSE Women's Health Service

Meath Primary Care  
1-9 Heytesbury St  
Portobello  
Dublin 8  
D08 Y1TW

**Opening Hours:** Clinic Times: Monday 2pm-4pm and Thursday 1.30pm to 3.30pm

**Tel:** 01 795 8280

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/)

**Email:** [ admin.whp@hse.ie ](mailto:admin.whp@hse.ie)

###  HSE Anti-Human Trafficking Team

Meath Primary Care  
1-9 Heytesbury St  
Portobello  
Dublin 8  
D08 Y1TW

**Opening Hours:** Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm

**Tel:** 01 795 8280

**Homepage:** [ https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/5/sexhealth/whp/)

**Email:** [ admin.whp@hse.ie ](mailto:admin.whp@hse.ie)

_**Page edited:** 17 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/human-trafficking/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Human%20trafficking&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/human-trafficking/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/human-trafficking/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Human%20trafficking&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/crime-
and-crime-prevention/human-trafficking/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

967.86224

  * [ _The It Makes Sense loan_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/microcredit-loans/)

This low-interest loan from participating credit unions is available to people
who get a social welfare payment.

916.1385

  * [ _Public Sector Equality and Human Rights Duty_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/human-rights/public-sector-equality-and-human-rights-duty/)

All public bodies in Ireland have a legal obligation to promote equality,
prevent discrimination and protect human rights under the Public Sector
Equality and Human Rights Duty.

906.9206

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

