**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Law and
rights ](/en/justice/law-and-rights/) > Access to Garda records

#  Access to Garda records

  * Introduction 
  * Can I access any data being held on me by the Gardaí? 
  * How do I apply to the Gardaí for my personal data? 
  * Refusals and appeals 

##  Introduction

The Garda Síochána holds information, data and records that are gathered and
processed in order to prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute crime.

You have the right to access certain information about you that is held by the
Gardaí under data protection laws.

##  Can I access any data being held on me by the Gardaí?

You can access any data being held but there are a number of restrictions on
the data you can access. In certain circumstances the Gardaí can refuse
access.

You can make a request to the Garda Síochána for a copy of any personal data
that it has about you. You are entitled to:

  * Get a copy of the personal data being kept about you 
  * Know why the data is being kept 
  * Know the identity of anyone that the Gardaí share the data with 
  * Know how the Gardaí obtained the data (unless it would be against public interest) 

You also have other rights under data protection law, including the right to
have any inaccurate personal information about you corrected or erased and the
right to complain to [ the Data Protection Commission
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/exercising-your-rights/raising-
concern-commission) .

Once the Gardaí receive a valid request from you, they must reply to you
within 1 month. This is the case even if they do not hold any of your personal
data or they are refusing the request.

If the Gardaí decide to provide the information to you, they must:

  * Supply the information to you within 1 month of receiving your request. (If your request is complicated or involves a large amount of data, the Gardaí can extend this period to 3 months. They must tell you they are doing this within 1 month of getting your request). 
  * Provide the information in a way that is clear. 

If you request a copy of your criminal record, personal data relating to [
spent convictions ](/en/justice/criminal-law/spent-convictions/) (if any) is
provided separately to other personal data relating to criminal records or
court outcomes.

You can authorise someone else to request your data, you will have to confirm
in writing that you are authorising this person to make the request. The
Gardaí will need to be satisfied as to the identity of your representative.

###  Can the Gardaí refuse my request?

In certain circumstances, the Gardaí can refuse your request for personal data
and withhold that information. These include where:

  * Your request for data would identify someone else. This also applies to the Gardaí's obligation to provide details of the source of the information. If the source or origin of the information identifies a third party, then it can be withheld. 
  * It would interfere in the prevention, detection or investigation of a crime, or interfere with arresting or prosecuting offenders. 

##  How do I apply to the Gardaí for my personal data?

Requests for personal data can be made using the [ Garda Siochana data access
request form (pdf) ](https://www.garda.ie/en/about-us/online-services/data-
protection-foi-police-certificates/an-garda-siochana-f20-october-2019-.pdf) .

You must provide enough information to establish your identity and to allow
the Garda Data Protection Processing Unit to locate the information you
request.

In order to get your own personal data, you need to provide the following:

  * Your full name 
  * Your date of birth 
  * Any other names used by you 
  * A copy of a recent utility bill or government letter sent to your current address (within the last 6 months) 
  * Photographic ID, for example, a copy of your passport or driving licence 

##  Refusals and appeals

You can make a complaint to the Data Protection Commission if you believe the
Gardaí are not following the law by refusing your request. [ When you raise a
concern with the Data Protection Commission
](https://www.dataprotection.ie/en/individuals/exercising-your-rights/raising-
concern-commission) , it will give you an update or outcome report within 3
months.

If the Data Protection Commission decides that the Gardaí are in breach of
data protection law, the Commission may serve an enforcement notice to make
the Gardaí give you the information you have requested.

Requests for your personal data, or a request on behalf of someone else should
be addressed to:

###  Garda Data Protection Processing Unit

National Vetting Bureau  
Government Buildings  
Vinegar Hill Lane  
Templeshannon  
Enniscorthy  
Wexford  
Y21 E924  
Ireland

**Locall:** 0818 488 488

For all other queries about Data Protection in An Garda Síochána contact:

###  Garda Síochána Data Protection Unit

Third Floor  
89-94 Capel Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 E3C6

**Tel:** +353 (01) 666 9521

**Email:** [ GDPR.DataProtection@garda.ie
](mailto:GDPR.DataProtection@garda.ie)

Appeals or complaints about a decision to refuse you access to information
held about you by the Gardaí should be made to:

###  Data Protection Commission

21 Fitzwilliam Square South,  
Dublin 2,  
D02 RD28  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 09:30 – 17:30, Monday–Friday (closed 13:00-14:00)

**Tel:** 01 765 0100 or 1800 437 737

**Homepage:** [ http://www.dataprotection.ie ](http://www.dataprotection.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ https://forms.dataprotection.ie/contact
](https://forms.dataprotection.ie/contact)

**Email:** [ info@dataprotection.ie ](mailto:info@dataprotection.ie)

_**Page edited:** 3 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
and-rights/access-to-garda-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Access%20to%20Garda%20records&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
and-rights/access-to-garda-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-and-
rights/access-to-garda-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Access%20to%20Garda%20records&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-
and-rights/access-to-garda-records/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to access your personal data under the GDPR_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document explains how to access your personal data under data protection
laws and the GDPR.

2946.6875

  * [ _Access to environmental information_ ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/access-to-environmental-information/)

You have the right to access certain information about the environment and
pollutants that may affect it. Find out how to access environmental
information.

1953.0449

  * [ _Access to medical records_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/access-to-medical-records/)

There are many ways you can access personal medical records. Find out how.

1940.9866

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

