**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Courtroom
](/en/justice/courtroom/) > Barristers

#  Barristers

  * Introduction 
  * What does a barrister do? 
  * How to become a barrister 
  * Junior and Senior Counsel 
  * Code of conduct 
  * How do I complain about a barrister? 

##  Introduction

A barrister (also called "counsel") is a type of lawyer who specialises in
court advocacy and giving legal opinions. There are two levels of barrister –
junior and senior counsel.

Barristers generally wear white collars and a black gown in most courts. They
may also wear a wig. In certain courts, such as the family law courts and the
children's court, barristers do not wear the wig and gown.

##  What does a barrister do?

Barristers have a wide range of different functions, including:

  * Providing legal advice and opinions in contentious matters (where there is a dispute ultimately being determined by someone like a judge) and non-contentious matters. In non-contentious matters, some barristers may be able to provide advice directly to a client. 
  * Writing legal documents, such as [ writs or pleadings ](/en/justice/civil-law/writs-and-pleadings/) , that must be filed in a case. 
  * Representing you in court and arguing your case before a judge, if your case goes to trial. 
  * Negotiating a settlement of your case instead of it going to trial. 
  * Acting as mediators or arbitrators in [ alternative dispute resolution ](https://www.lawlibrary.ie/find-a-mediator-arbitrator/alternative-dispute-resolution/) , where you and the other party want resolve a dispute outside of court 

###  Can I hire a barrister?

Barristers are not typically “hired” directly by a member of the public – they
are generally engaged by [ solicitors ](/en/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) to
work on a case and always when a matter is contentious. However, some non-
contentious matters can be dealt with by certain barristers hired by a member
of the public. If you contact a solicitor for legal advice, your solicitor may
recommend that a barrister be engaged to provide services.

Barristers operate on a ‘taxi-system’ and must be available to take work from
any solicitor who engages them, regardless of the size and resources of the
solicitor’s firm.

If you and your solicitor decide to engage a barrister, the solicitor will
send the barrister a brief containing all the relevant information and
documents to assist the barrister in the presentation of the case.

###  Barrister partnerships

Barristers must operate as  sole traders  and are currently not allowed to set
up "chambers" or partnerships with solicitors or other barristers. However, it
is not uncommon for two or more barristers to work together on a case. Groups
of barristers can also come together to tender for government work.

The [ Legal Services Regulation Act 2015
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2015/act/65/enacted/en/html) provides
for new business models for legal practitioners, including:

  * Solicitor-barrister partnerships 
  * Barrister-barrister partnerships 
  * Multi-disciplinary practices 

These new business models have not come into operation yet.

##  How to become a barrister

To become a barrister, you must pass the exams set by the [ Kings Inns
](https://www.kingsinns.ie/) . The Kings Inns is the body which governs entry
to the profession of barrister-at-law in Ireland.

After you have passed your exams, you must be ‘called to the Bar’ and you must
complete a year of ‘devilling’, which is a form of apprenticeship for
barristers.

Practising barristers must also be on the [ Roll of Practising Barristers
](https://www.lsra.ie/for-law-professionals/roll-of-practising-barristers/)
maintained by the [ Legal Services Regulatory Authority (LSRA)
](/en/justice/courts-system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/) .

If you are a qualified lawyer from outside of Ireland and wish to practice as
a barrister in Ireland, you must [ apply to be admitted to the Bar of Ireland
](https://www.kingsinns.ie/members/specially-qualified-applicants) . You can
read more about [ becoming a barrister ](https://www.lawlibrary.ie/join-
us/becoming-a-barrister/) on the Bar of Ireland website.

##  Junior and Senior Counsel

If you are involved in a court case, you may come across Junior and Senior
Counsel.

###  Junior Counsel

When barristers are first "called to the Bar", they act as Junior Counsel. A
Junior Counsel may have the letters BL after their name, which stand for
"Barrister at Law".

Junior Counsel tend to do most of the paperwork in cases (drafting legal
documents) and they represent clients mainly in the lower courts (the [
District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) and the [ Circuit
Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) ).

###  Senior Counsel

After about 10 to 15 years of practising as a Junior Counsel, a barrister may
[ apply ](https://www.lsra.ie/for-law-professionals/applications-for-senior-
counsel/) to become a Senior Counsel. This is sometimes called "taking silk"
because the Senior Counsel's gown was traditionally made of silk. A Senior
Counsel may have the letters SC after their name.

Senior Counsel are very experienced advocates who represent clients in the [
High Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/high-court/) , the [ Court of Appeal
](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/) and the [ Supreme Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/supreme-court/) . Usually, if a Senior Counsel is
involved in a case, there will also be a Junior Counsel to assist.

Experienced and/or specialist solicitors can also apply to become a Senior
Counsel and use the letters SC after their name. Solicitors appointed Senior
Counsel remain solicitors.

##  Code of conduct

Barristers, who are members of the Law Library, must act in accordance with
the [ Bar Council Professional Code of Conduct
](https://www.lawlibrary.ie/app/uploads/securepdfs/2022/07/Code-of-Conduct-
Amended-by-AGM-25.7.22.pdf) (pdf). Barristers are subject to many general
rules outlined in the code of conduct.

A barrister:

  * May only accept so much work as they can give adequate attention to within a reasonable time 
  * Must ensure confidentiality concerning client matters 
  * Has duties towards the courts and they cannot mislead a court in any way 

There are also [ more specific rules about the duties of barristers in
criminal cases ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/legal-representation-
in-criminal-cases/) .

##  How do I complain about a barrister?

Before 7 October 2019, complaints about barristers were made to [ The Bar of
Ireland ](https://www.lawlibrary.ie/) through the Barristers Professional
Conduct Tribunal.

Since 7 October 2019, if you have a complaint about inadequate services,
excessive costs or alleged misconduct against barristers, you can make a
complaint to the [ Legal Services Regulatory Authority (LSRA)
](/en/justice/courts-system/legal-services-regulatory-authority/) .

_**Page edited:** 25 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Barristers&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Barristers&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Functions and duties of individuals in a court of law_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/functions-and-duties-of-individuals-in-a-court-of-law/)

This document provides an introduction to the section outlining the different
functions and duties of individuals in a court of law.

1256.3867

  * [ _Victims of crime and the law_ ](/en/justice/victims-of-crime/victims-and-the-law/)

Legislation that has been implemented to protect and support victims of crime.

661.22504

  * [ _Court of Appeal_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/court-of-appeal/)

The main function of the Court of Appeal is to hear appeals from the High
Court and the Circuit Court.

619.0359

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

