**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > [ Criminal trials ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/) > Time limits for the start of criminal proceedings

#  Time limits for the start of criminal proceedings

  * Introduction 
  * Summary offences 
  * Indictable offences 
  * Special time limits 
  * Calculating the time limit for criminal proceedings to start 

##  Introduction

If you commit a criminal offence, Gardaí can only start criminal proceedings
if any legal time limit for that offence has not passed.

For many offences there are clear time limits on when criminal proceedings can
be brought against you.

The rules covering the time limit for the start of legal proceedings are set
out below.

##  Summary offences

If you have committed a [ summary offence
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases/) (an offence tried in the
[ District Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-
system/district-court/) before a [ judge
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) but without
a [ jury ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courtroom/jury/) ),
the Gardaí must make a complaint to the District Court **within 6 months** of
the offence being committed.

These offences include most [ Road Traffic Offences
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/driving-offences/) like speeding, illegal
parking and fixed charge notice offences.

###

##  Indictable offences

###

The time limits for summary offences do not apply to an [ indictable offence
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases/) . There is no time limit
for the start of legal proceedings for an indictable offence unless specific
legislation provides one.

But if there is an excessively long delay in prosecuting an offence, the judge
may decide not to hear the case. In making this decision, the judge considers
if the delay has reduced your chances of a fair trial. For example, if the
delay means that key [ witnesses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/types-of-witnesses/)
are no longer available to give evidence or if the delay could have affected
their memory of what happened.

An indictable offence can be tried in the District Court (summarily) or it can
be tried by a judge and jury in the Circuit Court or the [ Central Criminal
Court ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/high-
court/) ). This is set out in [ Section 7 of the Criminal Justice Act 1951
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1951/en/act/pub/0002/sec0007.html) (as
amended by [ Section 177 of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2006/en/act/pub/0026/sec0177.html) ).

If there is an excessively long delay in prosecuting an offence, the judge may
decide not to hear the case. In making this decision, the judge considers if
the delay has reduced your chances of a fair trial. For example, if the delay
means that key [ witnesses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/witnesses/types-of-witnesses/)
are no longer available to give evidence or if the delay could have affected
their memory of what happened.

###

##  Special time limits

###  Special time limits

The general time limit of 6 months for starting proceedings, applies to most
offences which are dealt with in the District Court. However, there are some
exceptions to this.

Because of the nature and difficulty of investigating some offences and of
gathering enough evidence to start proceedings, special time limits are
applied to them by law.

Examples of these offences include the following:

  * Getting car insurance by fraud or by knowingly making a false statement (any proceedings need not start until 3 months after the gardaí have sufficient evidence subject to a maximum time limit of 3 years) 
  * For offences under the Customs Acts, any proceedings must start within 2 years from the date of the offence. 
  * For offences under the Revenue Acts, any proceedings must start within 10 years from the date of the offence. This does not cover the actual repayment of any unpaid tax, which is a separate matter. 

###

##  Calculating the time limit for criminal proceedings to start

###

Usually, if you receive a summons to court and you get legal advice, your
solicitor will check the dates on the [ summons ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/summons/) to make sure that the Garda applied for it within
the time limit allowed. If the Gardaí applied for was made outside the time
limit, then the prosecution will be dismissed in court.

**Date the Gardaí make** **a complaint or application**

The important date is when the Gardaí make the complaint to the District Court
judge or the date they make the application to the appropriate court clerk to
issue a [ summons ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/summons/) . The date the summons was issued on or the date
on which the summons was served on you are not important for this purpose.

**Date of the offence**

The other important date is what date the offence took place. In most cases
this is usually very clear, such as in a case of speeding or theft.

However, the dates for certain offences are slightly different.

For example, if you are stopped by the Gardaí while driving on 1 January and
you are asked to show your motor insurance certificate. If you do not show it
there and then, you have the next 10 days to show it at a Garda station of
your choice.

If you fail to show within 10 days, then you have committed an offence. The
offence date does not start until **after** the 10 days have expired and the
date you were stopped does not count as one of the 10 days. Therefore, in this
case, 12 January would be the date from which a prosecution can be brought.

_**Page edited:** 18 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Time%20limits%20for%20the%20start%20of%20criminal%20proceedings&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Time%20limits%20for%20the%20start%20of%20criminal%20proceedings&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1105.5691

  * [ _Fines for criminal offences_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/)

Information on fines allowable for those summarily convicted in the District
Court or convicted on indictment in the Circuit Court or High Court.

1044.9891

  * [ _UN Convention on the Rights of the Child_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/children-s-rights-and-policy/un-convention-on-the-rights-of-the-child/)

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child sets out the basic human rights
to which every child is entitled. Ireland ratified the Convention on 28
September 1992. Find out more.

1014.24786

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

