**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Legal aid and
advice ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/) > Legal Aid Board

#  Legal Aid Board

  * Introduction 
  * Cases covered by the Legal Aid Board 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The Legal Aid Board is a statutory body established under the [ Civil Legal
Aid Act 1995 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0032/index.html)
. The main functions of the Board are to:

  * Provide legal aid and legal advice in civil cases (non-criminal cases) to people who meet the criteria 
  * Provide a family mediation service 
  * Provide information about its services 
  * Manage and administer three criminal legal aid schemes (but it does not provide direct legal aid or advice in respect of criminal matters) 
  * Assist in the operation of the Abhaile scheme (which helps people in home mortgage arrears) 

This Board consists of a chairperson and twelve other members. At least 5 of
the members of the Board must be women and 5 must be men. Two members of the
Board must be barristers, 2 must be solicitors and 2 must be members of the
staff of the Board.

The Board has a [ network of full-time and part-time law centres
](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Law_Centres)
throughout Ireland. The Board has also established panels of solicitors and
barristers in private practice who provide legal aid and advice under the Act.
If a barrister is required to deal with your case, the Legal Aid Board will
appoint one to represent you.

The Board's [ Family Mediation Service ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/family-mediation-separating-couples/)
helps couples who have decided to separate or divorce, or who have already
separated, to negotiate an agreed way forward, while addressing the needs and
interests of all involved.

##  Cases covered by the Legal Aid Board

###  Civil matters

The Legal Aid Board tends to provide legal aid and legal advice in the
following areas mainly:

  * Judicial separation 
  * Divorce 
  * Maintenance 
  * Domestic violence 
  * Custody of and access to children 
  * Problems relating to hire-purchase agreements 
  * Contract disputes 
  * Applications for asylum, subsidiary protection or permission to remain in Ireland 

The Board can give legal advice in most areas. It is generally prohibited from
providing legal aid in the following categories of cases:

  * Defamation claims - where a person's reputation has been damaged as a result of libel or slander 
  * Land disputes - disputes concerning rights and interests in or over land 
  * Civil matters covered by the small claims procedure 
  * Licensing (publicans' licences) 
  * Conveyancing - the legal transfer of a property from one party to another) 
  * Election petitions 
  * Claims made in a representative, fiduciary or official capacity (where a person is bringing a case on behalf of someone else or in an official capacity) 
  * Claims brought by a person on behalf of a group of persons to establish a precedent on a particular point of law ("test cases") 
  * Any other group or representative action ("class actions") 

Find out more about accessing [ civil legal advice and legal aid
](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) .

###  Criminal matters

The 3 ad-hoc criminal legal aid schemes the Board administers are:

  * The [ Garda Station Legal Advice Revised Scheme ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/garda-station-legal-advice-scheme/)
  * The [ Legal Aid â€“ Custody Issues Scheme ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/Legal_Aid_Custody_Issues_Scheme)
  * The [ Criminal Assets Bureau Ad-hoc Legal Aid Scheme ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/lab/publishing.nsf/Content/criminal_assets_bureau_ad-hoc_legal_aid_scheme)

The Board provides [ legal aid or advice to a _complainant_
](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/our-services/legal-aid-services/common-
legal-problems/rape-and-sexual-assault/) in certain criminal cases of sexual
offences, including rape, aggravated sexual assault and incest. A complainant
is the person making the complaint.

It also provides legal services in relation to criminal matters to alleged [
victims of human trafficking ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/Our-
Services/Legal-Aid-Services/Common-Legal-Problems/Human-trafficking/) .

Find out more about accessing [ criminal legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-
and-advice/criminal-legal-aid/) .

##  Further information

There is a [ network of Legal Aid Centres
](https://www.legalaidboard.ie/en/contact-us/find-a-law-centre/) throughout
Ireland. The headquarters of the Legal Aid Board is in Co. Kerry.

###  The Legal Aid Board

Quay Street  
Caherciveen  
Kerry  
V23 RD36  
Ireland

**Tel:** 066 947 1000

**Locall:** 0818 615 200

**Homepage:** [ http://www.legalaidboard.ie ](http://www.legalaidboard.ie)

**Email:** [ info@legalaidboard.ie ](mailto:info@legalaidboard.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 May 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Legal%20Aid%20Board&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Legal%20Aid%20Board&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/legal-aid-board/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Civil legal aid and legal advice_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/)

An explanation of civil legal aid and legal advice and the eligibility
criteria to be able to avail of it.

3017.9043

  * [ _Civil legal aid and cross border disputes_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-aid-and-cross-border-disputes/)

If you have a legal dispute in another EU country you may be able to avail of
legal aid in that country by applying to the Legal Aid Board.

2252.515

  * [ _Legal aid for asylum seekers_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/legal-aid-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

Legal aid is available to people who are applying for international protection
in Ireland.

2131.4353

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

