**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Civil law
](/en/justice/civil-law/) > Circuit Court procedures

#  Circuit Court procedures

  * Introduction 
  * Civil Bill 
  * Entering an appearance 
  * Delivering the defence 
  * Notice for particulars 
  * Case progression 
  * Setting down for trial 
  * Rates 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

In the [ Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) , the
person who is bringing the case, that is, the person who is suing, is known as
the _plaintiff_ . The person who is being sued is known as the _defendant_ .

To commence proceedings, that is, to start a legal action, the plaintiff or
the plaintiff's [ barrister ](/en/justice/courtroom/barristers/) prepares a
_Civil Bill_ . The purpose of this document is to state the case being made
against the defendant.

When the defendant receives the Civil Bill, they must _enter an appearance_ to
show that they are now a party to the case and intend to defend it. The
defendant will then issue a _defence_ setting out why they are not to blame.

If the defendant believes that they actually have a claim against the
plaintiff, the defendant will include a _counterclaim_ with the defence
setting out their claim against the plaintiff.

##  Civil Bill

If you are the plaintiff, you generally must issue a Civil Bill to commence
proceedings in the Circuit Court. Your [ solicitor ](/en/justice/civil-
law/representation-in-court/) may prepare the Civil Bill but usually a
barrister is briefed to do so.

There are [ different types of Civil Bill ](https://www.courts.ie/circuit-
court-forms) – your legal representatives will prepare the type of Civil Bill
that is appropriate to the nature of the case that you are bringing. For
example, if the case relates to a breach of contract, the appropriate Civil
Bill is an [ Ordinary Civil Bill ](https://courts.ie/content/ordinary-civil-
bill) . If your case relates to removing someone from your premises, the
appropriate Civil Bill is an [ Ejectment Civil Bill
](https://courts.ie/content/ejectment-civil-bill-non-payment-rent) .

###  Contents of the Civil Bill

The Civil Bill must contain the following information:

  * A title – the plaintiff's name and the defendant's name make up the title of the proceedings. 
  * The Bill should also describe the nature of the Civil Bill, for example "Ordinary Civil Bill". 
  * A description of the parties – the Bill must state the surname, first name, the residence or place of business and the occupation of the plaintiff and the defendant. 
  * A statement of the claim – the Bill must state the nature, extent and grounds of the plaintiff's claim against the defendant. It should clearly set out the allegations that are being made by the plaintiff and the damage that the plaintiff suffered. It should also state what the plaintiff is seeking from the court. 
  * The Bill must either state the specific amount to which the plaintiff claims they are entitled (which cannot be more than €75,000 or €60,000 in a personal injuries action) or it must state that the plaintiff's claim is limited to the jurisdiction of the court. The plaintiff cannot seek more than €75,000 from the Circuit Court, unless all sides agree to a higher limit. 
  * The Bill must recite the appropriate circuit in which the claim is being brought. 
  * The Bill must be dated and signed by the plaintiff or their solicitor. 
  * The Bill must state whether the plaintiff consents to the service of any documents from the defendant by email. 

###  Serving the Civil Bill

After the Civil Bill has been prepared by the barrister, your solicitor will
take it to the [ Circuit Court office ](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)
to be _issued_ – this involves paying the stamp duty. After the stamp duty has
been paid, the Civil Bill is stamped and it is ready to be served on the
defendant or the defendant’s solicitor.

There are different ways to serve the Civil Bill:

  * You may hand a copy of the Civil Bill to the defendant personally 
  * If attempts to serve the defendant personally have been unsuccessful, a copy of the notice can be given to the respondent’s spouse, civil partner, child (if they live with the respondent), employee or agent at the respondent’s last known residence or workplace, as long as that person is not under 16 years of age 
  * You may send a copy by registered prepaid post to the defendant's last known residence or place of business 

The rules applying to the service of Civil Bills are contained in [ Order 11
of the Circuit Court Rules ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/issue-civil-bills-
service-documents-si-no-132-2009) .

##  Entering an appearance

When the defendant receives the Civil Bill, they should _enter an appearance_
within 10 days. Entering an appearance is a very important step as it
indicates in writing that the defendant intends to defend the proceedings. The
time limit is not strict and, in most cases, an appearance can be entered
after the time has expired.

To enter an appearance, the defendant must lodge an [ Entry of appearance form
](https://courts.ie/content/entry-appearance) at the Circuit Court office. A
copy of the form must also be given to the plaintiff or the plaintiff's
solicitor.

###  Judgment in default

If the defendant fails to enter an appearance, the plaintiff can apply to
court for _judgment in default of appearance_ . This means that because the
defendant, by failing to enter an Appearance, has failed to acknowledge the
proceedings and failed to indicate that they intend to defend them, the
plaintiff may obtain a judgement from the court against the defendant without
the need for a trial.

If the defendant does enter an appearance but fails to deliver a defence (see
below), the plaintiff may obtain a _judgement in default of defence_ from the
court against the defendant.

##  Delivering the defence

The defendant must _deliver a defence_ to the plaintiff within 10 days of
entering an appearance. This means the defendant must send a [ notice called
Defence ](https://www.courts.ie/content/defence) to the plaintiff’s solicitor.
The 10-day time limit is not strict and, in most cases, a defence can be
delivered after the time has expired.

###  Defence content

There are no set rules about what must be contained in the Defence notice. The
document starts with the title of the proceedings.

It is up to the defendant to admit or deny the allegations that the plaintiff
has made in their Civil Bill. It is also up to the defendant to state any
specific defence that they are relying on. For example, if the defendant is
claiming that the plaintiff's claim has been brought outside of the mandatory
[ time limits ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-case/) ,
then the defendant should specifically plead that fact in the Defence.

If the plaintiff has made a specific allegation and the defendant fails to
deny that allegation in the Defence notice, it will be assumed that the
defendant is admitting that the allegation is true. For example, if the Civil
Bill claims that the plaintiff was involved in a road traffic accident and the
defence fails to deny that the road traffic accident occurred, then it is
assumed that the defendant is admitting that the road traffic accident
happened. It is not then necessary for the plaintiff to prove to the judge
that the accident occurred.

On the other hand, when the defendant specifically denies a claim that the
plaintiff has made, they are putting the plaintiff _on proof_ of the
allegation. This means that the plaintiff must prove that the claim is true.
For example, if the defendant specifically denies that the road traffic
accident occurred, the plaintiff must prove it by introducing evidence in
court.

###  Counterclaim

When a defendant receives a Civil Bill, they may decide that not only have
they done nothing wrong and the claim should not have been brought against
them, but that they have a claim against the plaintiff. In those
circumstances, they may wish to include a _counterclaim_ with their defence.

To make a claim against the plaintiff, a section titled Counterclaim is added
to the Defence. This must clearly set out the allegations that the defendant
is making against the plaintiff and what the defendant seeks from the court.

The defendant must lodge the Defence with Counterclaim at the Circuit Court
office. A copy of the form must also be given to the plaintiff's solicitor.

##  Notice for particulars

A defendant, at any time after being served with a Civil Bill and before
delivery of a defence, or a plaintiff, at any time after delivery of a defence
or counterclaim, may apply to the other party by a notice in writing for
_particulars_ . A notice for particulars is simply a formal request for more
information about the case. It contains specific questions or requests.

A request for copies of all or any of the documents upon which the action,
defence or counterclaim is founded is made on a [ Notice requiring copies of
documents ](https://courts.ie/content/notice-requiring-copies-documents) . A
request for information is made on a [ Notice requiring further information
](https://courts.ie/content/notice-requiring-further-information) . The
requested particulars should be delivered within 7 days of receiving the
notice.

For example, in a case involving a road traffic accident, the defendant may
send to the plaintiff a notice containing the following questions:

"Was the plaintiff's seat-belt fastened at the time of the accident?"

"Describe the exact location where the accident occurred with the aid of a
map".

The notice is usually prepared by the solicitor (sometimes with the advice of
a barrister).

###  Inadequate particulars

If, say, the plaintiff refuses to reply to the notice for particulars or does
not give adequate replies, the defendant should write to them identifying the
inadequacies and warning of a court application.

If the plaintiff continues to refuse to provide the requested particulars, the
defendant may apply to court. If the court agrees that the defendant is
entitled to replies to the information requested, the court may order the
plaintiff to reply to the notice for particulars.

A notice for particulars may be sent by either party at any stage before the
trial.

The rules applying to notice for particulars are contained in [ Order 17 of
the Circuit Court Rules ](https://courts.ie/rules/particulars-and-further-
particulars-claim-or-defence) .

##  Case progression

Case progression is a case management system where specific issues in a
dispute are identified and efforts are made to either resolve or narrow those
issues prior to trial. The purpose of case progression is to ensure that the
proceedings for trial are prepared in a manner which is fair, efficient and
likely to keep the costs as low as possible.

A direction that the proceedings be subject to case progression may be given
by the County Registrar or the judge where they are satisfied that it would be
appropriate to do so. The plaintiff or the defendant can also issue a motion
for case progression where they wish to engage in the process.

The County Registrar issues a [ summons to attend a case progression hearing
](https://www.courts.ie/content/summons-attend-case-progression-hearing) with
the Registrar, giving not less than 21 days’ notice. Not later than 7 days
before the hearing, the plaintiff must file at the Circuit Court office an
indexed book of pleadings exchanged between the parties and serve a copy of
the index on the defendant.

At the case progression hearing, the County Registrar will establish what
steps remain to be taken to prepare the case for trial and fix a timetable for
the completion of preparation of the case for trial. The Registrar may make
orders or give directions with respect to pleadings and other matters. The
Registrar may on the application of any of the parties or of the Registrar’s
own motion order that the proceedings or any issue therein be adjourned and
invite the parties to use mediation, conciliation, arbitration or other
dispute resolution process to settle or determine the proceedings or issue.

The rules applying to case progression are contained in [ Order 19A of the
Circuit Court Rules ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/case-progression-general-si-
no-539-2009) .

##  Setting down for trial

When a defence has been delivered, the plaintiff can serve a [ notice of trial
](https://courts.ie/content/notice-trial) or a [ notice for the fixing of a
date for trial ](https://courts.ie/content/notice-fixing-date-trial) (in
Dublin), as directed by the County Registrar. Not less than 10 days’ notice of
trial should be given (21 days’ notice in Dublin), unless otherwise agreed,
and the notice should be filed at the Circuit Court office.

It is often the case that other applications are necessary before the action
can be set down for trial. These applications are known as interlocutory
applications.

If the plaintiff fails to serve notice of trial within 10 days of the delivery
of the defence, the defendant can serve notice of trial on the plaintiff.
Alternatively, the defendant can apply to the court to dismiss the action for
want of prosecution.

The rules applying to setting down for trial are contained in [ Order 33 of
the Circuit Court Rules ](https://courts.ie/rules/trial-0) .

##  Rates

The stamp duty that must be paid when a Civil Bill is issued is generally
€130. There is no fee or stamp duty for entering an appearance.

The stamp duty that must be paid for lodging a Defence is €15 with a further
€15 if there is a counterclaim.

A list of [ Circuit Court fees ](https://courts.ie/circuit-court-fees) is
available on the Courts Service website.

Your solicitor and barrister will charge fees for their services.

##  Further information

The rules applying to appearance, defence and counterclaim are contained in [
Order 15 of the Circuit Court Rules ](https://courts.ie/rules/appearance-
defence-lodgment-offer-payment-lieu-lodgment-and-counterclaim) .

Further information on [ Circuit Court Rules ](https://courts.ie/circuit-
court-rules) and [ forms ](https://courts.ie/circuit-court-forms) is available
on the Courts Service website.

_**Page edited:** 24 October 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/circuit-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Circuit%20Court%20procedures&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/circuit-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/circuit-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Circuit%20Court%20procedures&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/circuit-court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Circuit Court_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/)

The Circuit Court is a court of local and limited jurisdiction. Ireland is
divided into 8 circuits for the purpose of this Court.

1636.174

  * [ _Proceedings in civil court cases_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/proceedings-in-civil-court-cases/)

Civil court cases follow a standard format. Information on proceedings, how
witnesses are called and liability.

1399.9781

  * [ _District Court procedures_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/district-court-procedures/)

A claim notice is used to commence proceedings in the District Court. Find out
more about the forms that are used and the procedures that are followed.

1205.0654

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

