**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Banking
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/) > Dormant accounts

#  Dormant accounts

  * Introduction 
  * What kind of accounts are included? 
  * When is an account dormant? 
  * How can I reclaim money in a dormantaccount? 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you have an account with a credit institution and you make no transactions
on it for 15 years, it becomes a dormant account. Credit institutions include
banks, building societies and An Post.

Credit institutions must contact you if you have not made a transaction on
your account in 15 years or more. If the institution cannot contact you, the
money in the account will be transferred to the Dormant Accounts Fund.

[ Unclaimed life assurance policies ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/insurance/unclaimed-life-insurance-policies/) can also be transferred
to the Fund.

If your money is transferred to the fund, your rights are not affected and you
can always [ reclaim the money
](dormant_bank_accounts_in_ireland.en.html#l5326d) (including interest). If an
account holder has died, the rights of their heirs are not affected.

Amounts in dormant accounts are paid into the Dormant Accounts Fund.

If someone dies without [ making a will ](/en/death/before-a-death/making-a-
will/) and their relatives cannot be found, the State is the ultimate
beneficiary of their estate. The proceeds of sale of property and any other
assets are placed in an Intestate Estates Fund Deposit Account, which may also
be paid into the Dormant Accounts Fund.

##  What kind of accounts are included?

The dormant account rules apply to:

  * Deposit, share or current accounts in a bank or building society 
  * An account, saving certificate, savings bond or instalment saving scheme with An Post 

The dormant account rules do not apply to accounts held in [ credit unions
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-unions/) .

##  When is an account dormant?

Your account becomes dormant on 30 September when you have made no
transactions in the previous 15 years.

The financial institution must notify you in writing, unless:

  * It has taken all reasonable steps to write to you but has not been able to or 
  * You have asked the institution not to contact you or 
  * You have an account with less than €100 

You have until 31 March of the following year to reactivate your account by
contacting the institution and carrying out a transaction on the account.

After that date, the funds are transferred to the Dormant Accounts Fund. Even
if the funds or property have been transferred to the Dormant Accounts Fund,
you or your next of kin still have a claim on your funds.

###  What is the Fund used for?

Funds that are not likely to be reclaimed are used to help people who:

  * Are economically or socially disadvantaged 
  * Are educationally disadvantaged 
  * Have a disability 

You can read how the money is spent each year in [ The Dormant Accounts Fund
Annual Action Plans and Annual Reports
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/769773-dormant-accounts-fund-annual-action-
plans-and-reports/) .  

##  How can I reclaim money in a dormantaccount?

If you think you may have a dormant account, or if you have been notified that
you do, you should complete the Dormant Account Claim Form and send it
directly to the credit institution. The Dormant Account Claim Form is in the
Banking and Payments Federation Ireland booklet, [ A Guide to Dormant Accounts
(pdf) ](https://bpfi.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Dormant-Account-Form-
September-2021-Website.pdf) . Send the completed Dormant Account Claim Form
directly to the credit institution

If the credit institution no longer exists, or has changed name, the Banking
and Payments Federation Ireland provides [ contact details for former banks
and building societies ](https://bpfi.ie/publications/dormant-accounts/) .

##  Further information

The law on dormant accounts is the Dormant Accounts Acts 2001–2012.

For general information on dormant accounts schemes, you can contact the
Department of Rural and Community Development or Pobal.

For enquiries about dormant bank accounts or for queries about tracing funds,
contact the relevant branch or head office of the credit institution. If the
credit institution no longer exists, contact the Banking and Payments
Federation Ireland.

###  Department of Rural and Community Development

Dormant Accounts

Trinity Point  
10-11 Leinster Street South  
Dublin 2  
D02 EF85

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/c376c9-dormant-
accounts-fund/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/c376c9-dormant-
accounts-fund/)

###  Pobal

Holbrook House  
Holles Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 EY84  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 511 7000

**Fax:** (01) 511 7981

**Homepage:** [ http://www.pobal.ie/ ](http://www.pobal.ie/)

**Email:** [ enquiries@pobal.ie ](mailto:enquiries@pobal.ie)

###  Banking and Payments Federation Ireland

Floor 3  
1 Molesworth Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 RF29  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 671 5311

**Homepage:** [ http://www.bpfi.ie ](http://www.bpfi.ie)

**Email:** [ info@bpfi.ie ](mailto:info@bpfi.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/dormant-bank-accounts-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Dormant%20accounts&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/dormant-bank-accounts-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/banking/dormant-bank-accounts-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Dormant%20accounts&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/dormant-bank-accounts-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Basic bank accounts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/standard-bank-account/)

Basic bank accounts are simple bank accounts with no fees or charges for
normal services. Find out how to get a basic bank account.

2043.9327

  * [ _Proof of identity to open a bank account_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/financial-institutions-and-identification/)

Before you open an account in a financial institution, you must show certain
evidence of identity.

1019.80237

  * [ _Banking and returning to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-finances/banking-and-returning-to-ireland/)

Read about your bank account options when returning to Ireland from abroad.

858.3595

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

