**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Debt ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/) > Debt collection

#  Debt collection

  * Introduction 
  * Contact between lenders and consumers 
  * Private debt collectors 
  * Legal proceedings 
  * Harassment and intimidation 

##  Introduction

If you owe money to someone you are their debtor. They are your creditor.

There are rules about how creditors can collect debts. They are entitled to
ask you to pay your debts but they are not entitled to harass or intimidate
you.

##  Contact between lenders and consumers

Under the [ Consumer Protection Code 2012
](https://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/consumer-protection/consumer-
protection-codes-regulations#unofficial-consolidation) , a lender that is
regulated by the Central Bank cannot phone you about your loan without your
agreement between 9pm and 9am from Monday to Saturday or at any time on a
Sunday or public holiday. They can only visit you in person if you have agreed
to the visit.

The lender is not allowed to call you or to visit you at your workplace unless
you are also living there, or unless all reasonable efforts to contact you
elsewhere have failed. Only the person involved in the loan can be contacted
about it. This means that your lender cannot contact your employer or a member
of your family about your loan.

To check whether a financial services firm is regulated by the Central Bank,
you can [ check the register at registers.centralbank.ie
](https://registers.centralbank.ie/) .

##  Private debt collectors

Instead of seeking repayment from you themselves, creditors sometimes sell the
debt to a private collection agency. Such agencies are not subject to
authorisation and supervision by the Central Bank.

However, if a lender that is regulated by the Central Bank outsources its debt
collection activities, any agent acting on its behalf must meet the
requirements of Irish financial services law. If it does not, the Central Bank
can impose penalties on the lender.

If a regulated lender plans to appoint a third party to engage with you about
arrears that you owe, it must write to you and explain their role.

##  Legal proceedings

If you do not engage with your creditor, they can initiate [ legal proceedings
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/court-procedures/) to recover the
debt.

##  Harassment and intimidation

All debt collectors, including private individuals and debt collection
agencies, are covered by [ Section 11 of the Non-Fatal Offences against the
Person Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/act/26/section/11/enacted/en/html#zza26y1997s11)
. Under the law, they cannot make a demand for payment of a debt if:

  * The demands are so frequent that they are expected to cause you or your family alarm, distress or humiliation 
  * They falsely suggest that non-payment will result in criminal proceedings 
  * They falsely suggest that they are authorised in an official capacity to enforce payment 
  * They use a false official document 

If your creditor or a debt collection agency does any of these things, you can
report it to [ An Garda Síochána ](http://www.garda.ie) . Anyone found guilty
of offences under the Act can be fined or sent to prison.

_**Page edited:** 3 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debt-
collection/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Debt%20collection&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debt-collection/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/debt-collection/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Debt%20collection&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debt-collection/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

985.37805

  * [ _Debt Relief Notices_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-notices/)

People on very low incomes who cannot pay their debts may apply for a Debt
Relief Notice.

795.5481

  * [ _Overview of mortgage debt_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-debt/)

Information for people facing mortgage arrears.

777.4314

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

