**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax/) > Tax for self-employed people

#  Tax for self-employed people

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Self-assessment 
  * COVID-19 measures 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you become self-employed you must register with Revenue as a self-employed
person. You pay tax on the profits from your business and on any other income
that you have.

If you make a late payment of any taxes due, you will be charged interest from
the due date to the date when your payment is received.

##  Rules

As a self-employed person you pay income tax under [ the self-assessment
system ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/business/self-assessment.html) , once a
year. Self-assessment means that you are responsible for making your own
assessment of tax due.

You pay Preliminary Tax (an estimate of tax due for your current trading year)
on or before 31 October each year and make a tax return for the previous year
not later than 31 October. If you pay and file your tax return online using
the [ Revenue Online Service (ROS)
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/online/ros/index.html) , the deadline is usually
slightly later.

For example, if your accounting year is from 1 January to 31 December each
year, you pay Preliminary Tax for 2024 by 31 October 2024, based on an
estimate of your liability for the full year. At the same time, you make a tax
return for 2023 and pay any taxes outstanding for that year. You are entitled
to the normal income tax credits and reliefs.

For 2024, you can claim an [ Earned Income Tax Credit
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-
and-employment/earned-income-credit/index.aspx) of €1,875 (in 2023 the amount
was €1,775). However, if you also qualify for the [ Employee Tax Credit
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-
and-employment/employee-tax-credit/index.aspx) (formerly known as the PAYE tax
credit), the combined value of these credits cannot be greater than the value
of the Employee Tax Credit.

You must keep proper records which include:

  * All purchases and sales of goods and services and 
  * All amounts received and all amounts paid out 

You must keep supporting records (for example, invoices, bank and building
society statements, cheque stubs and receipts). You do not have to send them
in to Revenue, but you must keep them in case of a Revenue audit.

You can claim certain business expenses against tax. Some examples include:

  * Purchase of goods for re-sale 
  * Wages 
  * Rent 
  * Rates 
  * Repairs 
  * Lighting and heating 
  * Running costs of vehicles or machinery used in the business 
  * Accountancy fees 
  * Interest paid on business loans 
  * Leasing payments on vehicles or machinery used in the business 
  * Contributions to your personal pension (up to certain limits). 

If you are working from home you may be able to claim a proportion of
household bills such as telephone, heating, lighting and broadband.

You can find more information on self-employment in [ Revenue’s guide to self-
assessment ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/guide-to-self-assessment/index.aspx) , which includes information
about how to fill in your tax return and important deadlines. [ Revenue also
has information on registering for tax ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-
business/registering-for-tax/index.aspx) and about the business expenses that
you can claim against income. Your local Revenue office can also help you with
any questions that you may have.

**Subcontractors:** If you are a self-employed subcontractor working in
construction, forestry or meat processing there is [ detailed information
about Relevant Contracts Tax ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/rct/index.html) on
Revenue's website.

###  Universal Social Charge, PRSI and VAT

**USC:** You must pay the [ Universal Social Charge (USC) ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) if your gross income is over
€13,000 in a year.

An extra charge of 3% applies to any self-employed income over €100,000. This
means that self-employed people pay a total of 11% USC on any income over
€100,000. The USC does not apply to social welfare or similar payments. You
pay your USC with your preliminary tax payment.

**PRSI:** Self-employed people pay [ Class S PRSI ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-prsi/) on their income.

####  Value Added Tax (VAT)

You must [ register for Value Added Tax (VAT)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/vat-registration/index.aspx) if your annual
turnover is more than, or is likely to be more than, a certain amount. The [
VAT registration threshold ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/vat-
registration/who-should-register-for-vat/vat-thresholds.aspx) depends on
whether you are supplying services or goods and how they are supplied.

As a trader you pay [ VAT on goods and services
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/vat/guide/general.html) acquired for the
business and charge VAT on goods and services supplied by the business. The
difference between the VAT charged by you and the VAT you were charged must be
paid to Revenue. If the amount of VAT paid by you exceeds the VAT charged by
you, Revenue will repay the excess. This ensures that VAT is paid by the
ultimate customer and not by the business.

Revenue has information on [ how to account for and pay VAT
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/accounting-for-vat/index.aspx) .

##  Self-assessment

If you are self-employed you should [ register for self-assessment
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/guide-to-self-
assessment/register-it-self-assessment.aspx) . You can [ read more about who
is required to self-assess ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-comply-
with-your-tax-obligations#l88efd) .

You (or an agent) must make your income tax return and self-assess your tax
liability for the previous year. You can:

  * File your Form 11 using the Revenue Online Service (ROS). [ Certain people **must** e-file using ROS ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-business/registering-for-tax/mandatory-electronic-payment-of-taxes-and-filing-of-tax-returns.aspx) . 
  * Fill out a paper [ Form 11 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/documents/form11.pdf) and send to Revenue 

If you have registered for self-assessment since 2015, you are required to
file and pay online.

Revenue has further information and video guides on [ filing your tax return
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/filing-your-
tax-return/index.aspx) .

Revenue also provides [ A Guide to Completing Pay and File Tax Returns (pdf).
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/it/leaflets/guide-pay-file.pdf)

If you use ROS to make your tax return online, it will calculate your self-
assessment based on the information you provide. You can choose to accept this
calculation or input your own self-assessment.

If you use the paper Form 11, it includes a self-assessment section which you
(or your agent) must complete and sign. If you file the paper tax return
early, before 31 August, Revenue will complete the self-assessment section on
your behalf.

##  COVID-19 measures

**Debt warehousing**

Some unpaid tax debt arising from the COVID-19 pandemic could be deferred or
_warehoused_ .

Debts that were warehoused are subject to 0% interest for the [ warehoused
period ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-business/paying-your-tax/debt-
warehousing/warehouse-periods.aspx) . After the period ends, a phased payment
arrangement is agreed and interest of 3% applies from this time.

You can get more information in Revenue’s [ Information Booklet on Warehousing
of Tax Debts (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/communications/documents/debt-
warehousing-reduced-interest-measures.pdf) .

**Income tax loss relief for self-employed**

A temporary income tax relief was introduced for self-employed people who were
profitable in 2019 but who made a loss in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Self-employed people could have their 2020 losses (and certain unused capital
allowances) carried back and deducted from their profits for 2019, to reduce
the amount of income tax on those profits. The maximum that could be carried
back was €25,000.

Revenue has a [ guide to the tax relief for self-employed people and how to
apply (pdf) ](https://revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-tax-capital-
gains-tax-corporation-tax/part-12/12-01-03.pdf) .

##  Where to apply

[ Lo-call telephone numbers and contact details for Revenue regional offices
are available on the Revenue website contact page
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact/lo-call.html) .

_**Page edited:** 29 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20for%20self-
employed%20people&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Tax%20for%20self-
employed%20people&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Checklist: information for self-employed people_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/checklist-entitlements-and-services-for-self-employed-people/)

Quicklinks to useful documents about self-employment.

2064.5466

  * [ _Self-employed and unemployment_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-unemployment/)

If your business has closed, or if you are self-employed but have less work
and less income than before, you may qualify for a social welfare payment.

1856.2001

  * [ _Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed)_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/)

Jobseeker’s Benefit (Self-Employed) is a payment to support people who lose
their self-employment.

1767.6802

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

