**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Coming to work in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/) > [
Finding work or starting a business ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/) > EU/EEA citizens and social welfare payments

#  EU/EEA citizens and social welfare payments

  * Introduction 
  * Types of social welfare payments 
  * Family payments 
  * Claiming social welfare if you lose your job or you are sick 
  * Residence rules for means-tested payments 
  * Pensions when you have worked in more than one country 
  * Further information and contacts 

##  Introduction

You have the right to work in Ireland if you are a citizen of the EU, the EEA
(the EEA includes the EU, Iceland, Lichtenstein and Norway) and Switzerland.

While you are working, you can claim the same family benefits that are
available to Irish citizens.

If you lose your job, or you stop working because you are sick, you can apply
for a social welfare payment to support you while you are looking for work or
recovering from illness. The Department of Social Protection (DSP) will assess
your application and decide if you qualify for a payment.

You cannot claim a social welfare payment if you have arrived in Ireland to
look for a job. However, you may be able to import your unemployment payment
from another EEA country for a limited time.

The EU has rules on how social welfare is co-ordinated between EEA countries,
including Switzerland.

##  Types of social welfare payments

There are EU rules about how payments are coordinated between countries. But
each country also has its own rules. For example, the rate of payment and how
long a benefit is paid for differs from country to country.

Ireland has many different [ social welfare payments
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/social_welfare_payments/)
.

Most payments are either based on the social insurance contributions you have
made through work or your income (the DSP will carry out a means test to find
your level of income).

###  Payments based on your social insurance

Some social welfare payments are based on your [ social insurance
contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) (PRSI) from work. If you are an
employee, your employer pays PRSI for you. If you are [ self-employed
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-
s-prsi/) , you pay PRSI as part of your yearly tax return.

You can use the contributions you paid in another EEA country to qualify for
these payments, but your most recent social insurance contribution must have
been paid in Ireland.

###  Payments based on your income

Some payments are [ based on your means ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) . In a
means test the Department of Social Protection examines all your sources of
income (including capital and savings). To get a means-tested payment, your
income must be below a certain amount.

You must also meet the [ Habitual Residence Condition ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) to get a means-tested payment. For some payments, the
residence rules do not apply to EEA or Swiss workers. See ‘residence rules for
means-tested payments’ below.

Each payment has its own qualifying criteria and rules about who can qualify.
Detailed information is available in our [ social welfare section
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/) .

##  Family payments

If you are an EEA or Swiss citizen and working in Ireland, you can claim
family payments if you have dependent children living in Ireland or in another
EEA country or Switzerland.

You can claim [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/child-benefit/) if you have a child or children under the age of 16.
This is paid regardless of how much money you earn. If your child lives in
another EEA country or Switzerland, Ireland may pay the full rate or a ‘top
up’.

A ‘top ‘up’ can happen when the other parent of the child gets an equivalent
payment from the country they live in, but at a lower rate.

**Family payments for EU and EEA citizens** **Payment** |  **Who is it for?**  
---|---  
Child Benefit  |  Parents of children aged under 16 (or under 18 if the child is in education, training or has a disability and cannot support themselves)   
Working Family Payment  |  Working parents who are on a low income. The amount you can get depends on how many children you have and how much you are paid.  The applicant must be employed (not self-employed) for at least 38 hours per fortnight.   
One Parent Family Payment  |  People who are parenting alone. The payment is means tested (based on how much money you have)   
Domiciliary Care Allowance  |  A parent of a child with a disability   
Guardian’s Payment  |  A person who is looking after a child because the child’s parents are dead, or have abandoned or failed to look after the child   
  
##  Claiming social welfare if you lose your job or you are sick

EU workers (including self-employed people) have the [ right to reside in
Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-
ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/) . This applies to EEA and Swiss
citizens also. If you stop working, you can keep your right to reside status
for a period in some circumstances.

You may need to claim a social welfare payment, if you become unemployed or
cannot work because you are sick or incapacitated.

###  Losing your job

The type of payment you can get when you become unemployed depends on how long
were working in Ireland, or if you can use your social insurance contributions
from another EEA country. You may get:

  * [ Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) \- You must meet the criteria and have enough social insurance contributions. You can use contributions paid in another EEA country or Switzerland before you came to Ireland, but your most recent contribution must have been paid in Ireland. 
  * [ Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) \- You must meet the criteria and the habitual residence condition (see below). This is a means-tested payment. 
  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) \- You can claim this for up to 6 months if you worked in Ireland for less than a year, or for as long as you are looking for work if you worked in Ireland for more than a year. This a means-tested payment. 

If the business closed down or reduced its workforce, you may be entitled to a
[ redundancy payment ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-payments/) .

###  Sick or incapacitated

If you are sick and unable to work temporarily, you can claim:

  * [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/) \- You must meet the criteria and have enough social insurance contributions. You can use contributions paid in another EEA country or Switzerland before you came to Ireland, but your most recent contribution must have been paid in Ireland. 
  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) \- This a means-tested payment. 

If you become incapacitated (that is, you are unable to work permanently) and
have enough social insurance contributions you can claim [ Invalidity Pension
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) . If you do
not have the contributions to get the full rate of Invalidity Pension, you may
be entitled to a reduced payment if you do not have enough Irish
contributions, but have [ contributions from another EEA country or
Switzerland ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-
social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) .

##  Residence rules for means-tested payments

Each social welfare payment has its own conditions. You can read about the
rules for each payment in our [ social welfare section
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/) .

Some payments are only available if you are ‘ [ habitually resident
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-
payments/habitual-residence-condition/) ’ in Ireland. The Department of Social
Protection assesses if you have:

  1. The [ legal right to reside in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)
  2. A proven close link to Ireland. 

EEA and Swiss **workers** (including those who kept their worker status when
they stopped working) do not need to satisfy the habitual residence condition
to get a family payment or [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) .

You can read more about the [ habitual residence condition ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) for social welfare payments.

##  Pensions when you have worked in more than one country

You may qualify for a pension from Ireland when you reach pension age.

A [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-contributory/) is based on your PRSI contributions. If
you have not paid enough contributions to qualify for a pension, you may still
qualify for an EU pro-rata pension. A pro-rata pension is based on your
contributions in Ireland and other EEA countries. Ireland pays you based on
the proportion of these contributions that you paid in Ireland.

If you live in Ireland when you reach 66 and you do not qualify for the
maximum State Pension (Contributory), you may be entitled to the [ State
Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-non-contributory/) .

It is possible to get a pension from more than one country if you meet the
qualifying conditions for each country.

###  Different retirement ages

Pension age is not the same across the EU. This means you may reach the
pension age in a country you worked in, before you reach the pension age in
Ireland. Your Irish contributions cannot be assessed for your pro-rata pension
until you reach the Irish pension age of 66.

For example, if you worked in a country with a lower pension age than Ireland,
the years that you worked in Ireland cannot be used to increase that pension
because you have not reached the Irish pension age of 66. When you reach 66,
you can claim an Irish pension, your original pension may be increased and you
may also get a pension from Ireland.

###  Where to apply for a State pension

You apply in the country where you live. You don’t need to make separate
applications in each country you have lived in. If you live in Ireland, you
make an application for an Irish pension (if you are reaching 66) or you fill
in form [ EUP65 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/70677/d9a8ea0ec5da486e9fe2be9260a6c6b7.pdf) if you
want to apply for a pension in another country in the EEA.

##  Further information and contacts

You can read more about the [ Irish social welfare system
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social_welfare/) .

The Department of Social Protection has a list of [ Intreo (social welfare)
offices ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

_**Page edited:** 9 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-
welfare/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=EU/EEA%20citizens%20and%20social%20welfare%20payments&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-
welfare/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-
welfare/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=EU/EEA%20citizens%20and%20social%20welfare%20payments&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-
welfare/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Going abroad or on holidays and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/going-abroad-and-social-welfare-payments/)

Outlines the social welfare payments that will continue to be paid if you go
abroad. It also lists the payments that will not be paid if you go abroad.

2190.4446

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2004.2532

  * [ _Capital and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/)

Capital for Irish social welfare purposes includes property, savings and
investments. Find out how to assess income from capital for social welfare
payments.

1954.6323

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

