**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Ukrainian refugees in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-
ireland/) > Accommodation Recognition Payment for hosting refugees from
Ukraine

#  Accommodation Recognition Payment for hosting refugees from Ukraine

  * What is the Accommodation Recognition Payment? 
  * How to qualify for the Accommodation Recognition Payment 
  * Do I have to wait 6 months before applying for the ARP? 
  * Rate of the Accommodation Recognition Payment 
  * How to apply for the Accommodation Recognition Payment 
  * More information 

##  What is the Accommodation Recognition Payment?

The Accommodation Recognition Payment (ARP) is a tax-free payment of €800 per
month for each property used to provide accommodation to refugees from
Ukraine. The payment increased to €800 per month from 1 December 2022.

The accommodation must be provided for at least 6 months and meet [ the
required standards ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/85e79-accommodation-
standards/) .

You cannot get this payment if there is a rental agreement with the person
being hosted. However, the payment is not affected if they contribute towards
costs such as utilities and food.

The ARP can be back dated to 4 March 2022 or from when you started providing
accommodation. The rate of payment was €400 per month until 1 December 2022.

It is not taken into account in the means test for any grants or payments from
the Department of Social Protection or other public bodies.

##  How to qualify for the Accommodation Recognition Payment

To qualify for the Accommodation Recognition Payment (ARP) you must:

  * Be aged 18 or over 
  * Be the owner of, or a tenant in, the accommodation being provided and have the consent of any other owners or tenants 
  * Be providing (or have provided) accommodation for at least 6 months to at least one person covered by the [ EU Temporary Protection Directive ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/temporary-protection-directive/)
  * Have at least one person who is covered by the EU Temporary Protection Directive living in the property on the last day of the calendar month to get a payment for that month 

Garda vetting is not required.

The accommodation must be in Ireland and meet the required standards. These
standards apply even if you are providing the accommodation in your own home.
You can find [ more detail on the required standards
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/85e79-accommodation-standards/) and a
useful [ checklist for your property
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/85e79-accommodation-standards/#checklist)
.

The [ absence protocol
](http://citizensinformationboard.newsweaver.com/6xhzlt1oik/mlqf8dksz0f1a2gyz3mbeo/external?email=true&a=5&p=11886148&t=2911414)
and the [ Christmas 2023 absence policy
](http://citizensinformationboard.newsweaver.com/6xhzlt1oik/1hmgdnzj1so1a2gyz3mbeo/external?email=true&i=2&a=5&p=11886148&t=2911414)
do not apply to refugees from Ukraine living hosted accommodation.

##  Do I have to wait 6 months before applying for the ARP?

You do not have to wait 6 months before applying for the ARP. However, when
you apply you must make a commitment to provide the accommodation for at least
6 months.

###  Do I have to repay the ARP if I provide accommodation for less than 6
months?

You must make a commitment to provide the accommodation for 6 months. However,
if you are unable to meet the 6-month commitment, you do not have to repay the
ARP paid to you for the months that the person covered by the EU Temporary
Protection Directive lived in your accommodation.

You must notify the Department of Social Protection that the person has left
your accommodation.

##  Rate of the Accommodation Recognition Payment

The Accommodation Recognition Payment (ARP) is a set monthly rate of €800 per
property from 1 December 2022. It was previously €400 per month.

If there are other costs and you are experiencing financial difficulty, you
can apply for the [ Additional Needs Payment
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/4eb45-additional-needs-payment/) . The
Additional Needs Payment is decided on a case-by-case basis.

###  Getting paid

The ARP is paid on the second Tuesday of each month.

It will be paid by Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) to the bank account on your
application. Payments can be made to an Irish, UK, SEPA, N26 or Revolut bank
account.

##  How to apply for the Accommodation Recognition Payment

You can apply for the Accommodation Recognition Payment online using [
MyWelfare ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/ukraine-emergency-
supports/accommodation-recognition-payment/) .

You will need to supply the following information:

  * Your name, [ PPS number ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) and address 
  * Details of the accommodation including the Eircode 
  * The date you started providing accommodation to people covered by the EU Temporary Protection Directive and the end date (if it has ended) 
  * The name and PPS number of each person covered by the EU Temporary Protection Directive that you are providing accommodation to, the date they began living in the accommodation and the date they left (if they have left the accommodation) 

##  More information

The Accommodation Recognition Payment (ARP) is administered by the Department
of Social Protection (DSP). If you have questions about your payment, contact
the DSP by phone on 0818 70 80 90 (9am to 5pm, Monday to Friday) or by email
at [ ARP@Welfare.ie ](mailto:cis@welfare.ie)

If you have a question about the scheme or on accommodation standards, contact
the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth by
phone on (01) 6473000 or by email at [
ukrainerecognitionpayment@equality.gov.ie ](mailto:cis@welfare.ie)

You can get support and practical information about providing accommodation to
refugees from Ukraine from [ offer a home, offer hope
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/32f0a-offer-a-home-offer-hope/) .

_**Page edited:** 8 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Accommodation%20Recognition%20Payment%20for%20hosting%20refugees%20from%20%20Ukraine&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Accommodation%20Recognition%20Payment%20for%20hosting%20refugees%20from%20%20Ukraine&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Payment for people who retire at 65_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/payment-for-people-retired-at-65/)

If you retire at 65, you may qualify for a benefit payment until you reach 66.
The payment is similar to Jobseeker’s Benefit, but you don’t need to be
looking for work or sign on at your local Intreo centre.

1409.0005

  * [ _Tenants' rights to stay in rented accommodation_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/types-of-tenancy/)

Security of tenure is a tenant’s right to stay in rented accommodation for a
set amount of time.

1388.2288

  * [ _Sharing accommodation with your landlord_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities/sharing-accommodation-with-your-landlord/)

This document explains the position of tenants who live in their landlord's
home. There are different rules, depending on whether or not your
accommodation is self-contained.

1212.604

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

