**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Moving to Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/) > [ Studying in
Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/) >
Immigration rules for full-time non-EEA students

#  Immigration rules for full-time non-EEA students

  * Studying in Ireland 
  * Finding a full-time course 
  * Other conditions 

##  Studying in Ireland

Non-EEA nationals coming to study in Ireland must be enrolled in an eligible
full-time course. You can read a list of [ frequently asked questions
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/frequently-asked-
questions-for-students/) for non-EEA students on the website of Immigration
Service Delivery (ISD).

Students who are from a country that [ requires a visa to enter Ireland
](/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-
ireland/) , must apply for a student visa. Their visa application must include
[ evidence that they have access ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-
study-in-ireland/what-are-my-study-options/a-fee-paying-private-primary-or-
secondary-school/information-on-student-finances/) to €10,000 when they come
to Ireland.

All non-EEA students, including those who do not require a visa, must [
register with their local immigration officer ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/registration-of-non-eea-nationals-in-
ireland/) to get permission to remain in Ireland for more than 90 days.
Students who plan to study for up to 6 months must have access to €700 per
month or €4,200 (whichever is the lesser) when they first register with their
local immigration officer.

##  Finding a full-time course

Non-EEA nationals coming to study in Ireland must be enrolled in a full-time
course in one of the following categories. They are not allowed to come to
Ireland to do a part-time or distance learning course.

###  Higher education programmes

Non-EEA nationals can enrol in an eligible course at level 6 or above on the [
National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ) ](http://www.qqi.ie/Pages/National-
Framework-of-Qualifications-%28NFQ%29.aspx) . Eligible courses are listed on
the [ Interim List of Eligible Programmes (ILEP)
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-my-
study-options/a-third-level-course-or-a-language-course/) . The maximum time
they can study in Ireland at this level is 7 years. There are exceptions to
this limit for students doing a PhD or a course such as medicine and for
students in special circumstances such as illness.

Students must have a certain standard of English. They must also prove that
they are progressing in the course, for example, passing exams. The [ ISD
website ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-
my-study-options/) has more information on the requirements, including
immigration rules for students on higher education programmes, and the
requirement to have [ medical insurance
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/what-are-my-
study-options/a-fee-paying-private-primary-or-secondary-school/private-
medical-insurance/) .

**Third Level Graduate Scheme:** When they graduate, students may get an
extension of their permission to remain in Ireland under the [ Third Level
Graduate Scheme ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/third-level-graduate-programme/) . The scheme
allows them to find employment and apply for a [ General Employment Permit
](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/work-permits/) or [
Critical Skills Employment Permit ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/green-card-permits/) .

Graduates with a level 8 qualification may get a 12-month extension to their
residence permission up to a maximum of 7 years of student permission overall
(that is, total time spent on [ Stamps 2 and 1G
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-
permission/information-on-registering/immigration-permission-stamps/) ).
Graduates with qualifications at level 9 or above may get a 24-month extension
(2 blocks of 12-months) to their permission up to a maximum of 8 years of
student permission overall.

###  English-language programmes

Eligible English-language courses are listed in the [ Interim List of Eligible
Programmes (ILEP) ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-
ireland/what-are-my-study-options/a-third-level-course-or-a-language-course/)
. Further education programmes and overseas-accredited vocational education
and training programmes are no longer listed as eligible courses and the
Internationalisation Register has ceased to exist.

The immigration permission to attend a 25-week English-language course is for
8 months. New students attending language courses may be granted permission
for a maximum of 3 language courses. This amounts to a total immigration
permission of 2 years (3 x 8 months).

ISD has published a [ frequently asked questions for students
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-ireland/frequently-asked-
questions-for-students/) .

###  Student visa/permission renewals

You can renew your permission with the [ local immigration officer
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-permission/)
for the district in which you live. If you live in Dublin, Kildare, Meath or
Wicklow you can [ renew your student permission online
](https://burghquayregistrationoffice.inis.gov.ie/) . Your Irish Residence
Permit will be sent to you by post.

If your registration is refused and you believe that you have exceptional
circumstances, you can [ apply for an extension of your student permission by
post ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/introduction-of-application-form-for-
extension-of-student-permission/) only.

**Summer 2024: If you are waiting for a course to start**

English Language students who have successfully completed a second English
language course on or after 1 July 2024, or a third English language course,
and have enrolled for a Higher Education Programme (HEP) which starts by the
end of October 2024, may apply for a [ short term Stamp 2 immigration
permission ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/english-language-students-
stamp-2-bridging-permission-2024-update/) to stay in Ireland until 30
September 2024.

You must renew your immigration permission before your short-term permission
ends on 30 September 2024.

##  Other conditions

###  Changing course

Students may not change course during the first year of study. After that they
may be allowed to change to another course, provided it is at the same or a
higher level. They may not change from a full-time to a part-time course.

###  Work

Non-EEA students with Stamp 2 permission to remain are allowed to take up
casual employment. They can work up to 20 hours a week during term time and up
to 40 hours a week in the holidays. Holiday periods have been standardised –
June to September inclusive and from 15 December to 15 January.

Students with stamp 2A permission are not allowed to work.

###  Social welfare

Non-EEA students are not entitled to social welfare payments. One of the
conditions of their residence permission is that they have enough money to
support themselves and live in Ireland without claiming State benefits.

###  Family reunification

Generally, non-EEA students coming to Ireland have no right to bring their
family with them. Spouses, partners and children of non-EEA nationals can
apply to enter and live in Ireland in their own right, but they cannot apply
on the basis of their relationship to a non-EEA student. There are some
exceptions to this rule, for example, for PhD students.

###  Short-stay language courses and semesters

There are special arrangements for [ non-EEA students coming to Ireland to do
a short course ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-study-in-
ireland/what-are-my-study-options/a-short-term-course/) . The course must be
for less than 90 days.

_**Page edited:** 25 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/immigration-nonEEA-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Immigration%20rules%20for%20full-
time%20non-EEA%20students&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/immigration-nonEEA-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/immigration-nonEEA-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Immigration%20rules%20for%20full-time%20non-
EEA%20students&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/studying-in-ireland/immigration-nonEEA-
students/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _School transport for post-primary students_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-school-transport-scheme/)

The Department of Education provides subsidised school transport for eligible
post-primary students.

1039.2411

  * [ _Grants and funds for mature students_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-students/)

Information on grants and funds available for mature students in third-level
education.

1000.77216

  * [ _HEAR admissions scheme for students from disadvantaged backgrounds_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/third-level-admissions-scheme-for-students-from-disadvantaged-backgrounds/)

Higher Education Access Route (HEAR) is a scheme to improve access to college
for school leavers from disadvantaged backgrounds.

995.3933

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

