**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Tax on savings and investments ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/) > Employee share schemes

#  Employee share schemes

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * More Information 

##  Introduction

Employees can avail of certain share options from their company that may be
exempt from income tax.

There are 3 main ways in which an employee can benefit from shares in the
company:

  * Approved Profit-Sharing Schemes 
  * Share Options 
  * Key Employee Engagement Programme (KEEP) 

Generally, gains arising from various share schemes are subject to the
Universal Social Charge (USC) and Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI). Gains
from share options on the KEEP programme are instead subject to [ Capital
Gains Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-gains-tax/) .

##  Rules

###  Approved Profit-Sharing Schemes

Approved Profit Sharing Schemes allow an employer to give an employee shares
in the company up to a maximum value of â‚¬12,700 per year.

Providing the scheme meets the required conditions, you will pay no income tax
on shares up to the maximum value. The employer must hold the shares for a
period of time (called the "retention period") and you must not dispose of the
shares before 3 years. If you dispose of the shares earlier, you are liable to
pay income tax on the lower of:

  * The market value of the shares when they were given to you or, 
  * The value of the shares at the time of sale 

Approved Profit Sharing Schemes are subject to a number of conditions that
should be checked with Revenue. Revenue provides [ further information on
Approved Profit Sharing Schemes. ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-
incomes/employment-related-shares/revenue-approved-share-schemes/approved-
profit-sharing-schemes.aspx)

###  Share options in your employer's company

Revenue-approved savings-related share option schemes allow you to save for
and buy share options in your employer's company tax effectively. You should
check with Revenue and your employer what rules apply to your share options
and when you are liable to pay tax.

You can read more about savings-related share option schemes in [ Revenue's
information on approved shares schemes ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-
incomes/employment-related-shares/revenue-approved-share-schemes/index.aspx)
and in the Revenue [ Tax and Duty Manual on Save as You Earn Schemes (pdf)
](https://revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/share-schemes/chapter-12.pdf) .

###  Key Employee Engagement Programme (KEEP)

The Key Employee Engagement Programme allows small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) to use share-based remuneration for key employees. It is
intended to help SMEs compete with larger companies in recruiting and
retaining employees.

When you exercise a qualifying share option under the KEEP programme, any gain
will not be subject to income tax, PRSI or USC. The gain will be subject to
Capital Gains Tax when you dispose of the shares.

This incentive was introduced for qualifying share options granted between 1
January 2018 and 31 December 2023. In Budget 2023, it was announced that the
programme would be extended until 31 December 2025.

Revenue have published [ detailed information about KEEP (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/share-
schemes/Chapter-09.pdf) .

##  More Information

There is [ information on employment-related shares on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-incomes/employment-related-
shares/index.aspx) .

_**Page edited:** 22 September 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/employee-share-option-
schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employee%20share%20schemes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/employee-share-option-
schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/employee-share-option-
schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employee%20share%20schemes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/employee-share-option-
schemes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Taxation of benefits from employment_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-benefits-from-employment/)

Employees can get certain benefits in addition to their salary or wages. Most
of these benefits are taxed.

1275.4731

  * [ _Employees' rights and entitlements_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employee-rights-and-entitlements/)

Employees have a number of legal employment rights and protections in Ireland.

1208.1646

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1054.594

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

