**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Maintenance payments and tax

#  Maintenance payments and tax

  * Introduction 
  * Types of maintenance payments 
  * If you make maintenance payments 
  * If you get maintenance payments 
  * How to claim tax relief 

##  Introduction

When a couple separate, they may agree that payments will be made to support a
child or former partner. It may be a legal agreement or a voluntary agreement
between the former partners.

The way maintenance payments are taxed depends on whether they are:

  * Voluntary or made under a legal agreement 
  * For the benefit of a former partner or for the benefit of a child 

A former partner is:

  * A separated or former spouse or civil partner 
  * A former cohabitant you lived with, while not married, for at least: 
    * 2 years if you have children together 
    * 5 years if you do not have children together 

This page explains the different  types of payments  and how they affect your
tax if you are:

  * Making maintenance payments 
  * Getting maintenance payments 

In summary, [ legally enforceable maintenance payments
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-
and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/#42c886) for a former partner are:

  * Taxable for the person getting the payments 
  * Tax deductible for the person making the payments 

Voluntary maintenance payments are not taken into account in the tax of either
former partner.

Maintenance payments for the benefit of your child or children are also
ignored for tax purposes.

##  Types of maintenance payments

###  Legally enforceable maintenance payments

Legally enforceable maintenance payments are payments you regularly make
(weekly, monthly or annually) to a former partner under:

  * A court order 
  * A deed of separation 
  * Any other legal commitment (such as a covenant or trust) 

It can also include payments that you are legally required to make on behalf
of your former partner, such as a mortgage payment.

####  **Option to be taxed as married couple**

If you have a legally enforceable maintenance agreement, you and your former
spouse or civil partner can together choose to be treated as a married couple
or civil partners for tax purposes. If you write to Revenue to choose this
alternative option:

  * The maintenance payments are ignored for tax purposes 
  * You are assessed on the basis of [ separate assessment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/#0f5a15)

###  Voluntary maintenance payments

Payments you make to your former partner without a legal agreement are called
voluntary maintenance payments.

##  If you make maintenance payments

###  Legally enforceable maintenance payments

If you make legally enforceable maintenance payments, you can have the
payments deducted from the amount of your income that is taxed.

You can [ claim tax relief ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/#83a792) on
payments you make for the benefit of your former partner. Payments you make
for the benefit of your children do not get tax relief.

You must make the maintenance payments in full.

This does not apply if you and your former partner choose to be taxed as a
married couple. In this case the payments are ignored for income tax.

###  Voluntary maintenance payments

You cannot claim an income tax deduction for voluntary maintenance payments.

If the maintenance payments you make are more than your former partnerâ€™s
income, you can claim the [ married person tax credit
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/marital-and-civil-status/personal-tax-credit/index.aspx) (but not
the [ increased standard rate band ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-
pensions/calculating-your-income-tax/increased-rate-band.aspx) ).

##  If you get maintenance payments

###  Legally enforceable maintenance payments

If you get a legally enforceable maintenance payment that is for your benefit,
you must pay:

  * [ Income Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/)
  * [ Universal Social Charge ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) (USC) 
  * [ Pay Related Social Insurance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/) (PRSI) 

You do not pay tax on payments that are specifically for the benefit of your
children.

If you and your partner choose to be taxed as a married couple, you do not pay
tax on the maintenance payments you get.

###  Voluntary maintenance payments

If you get voluntary maintenance payments, you do not pay:

  * [ Income Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/)
  * [ Universal Social Charge ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) (USC) 
  * [ Pay Related Social Insurance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/) (PRSI) 

You may have to pay [ Capital Acquisitions Tax ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) if the total amount of the
payments is [ over a certain amount
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/#2d5ff5) .

##  How to claim tax relief

There is a Revenue form to [ Claim for Relief for Legally Enforceable
Maintenance Payments (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-
incomes/documents/claim-relief-legally-enforceable-maintenance-payments.pdf) .

If you are claiming for the current tax year, an amended certificate of tax
credits will be sent to you and your employer will pay any refund due to you.

If your claim is for a previous tax year or during a period of unemployment,
Revenue will pay you any refund due. Tax refunds can be paid by cheque or to
your bank account.

_**Page edited:** 24 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Maintenance%20payments%20and%20tax&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Maintenance%20payments%20and%20tax&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Maintenance and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/)

If you have income from maintenance payments, this may be assessed in the
means test for social welfare payments. However, maintenance payments for
children are not assessed.

2018.6128

  * [ _Taxation of social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

Find out which social welfare payments are taxable, and which payments are
not.

1498.6669

  * [ _Taxation of lump sum payments_ ](/en/employment/retirement/income-tax-in-retirement/retirement-lump-sum-taxation/)

Lump sum payments in compensation for loss of employment are subject to tax.
How is tax calculated and what are your entitlements?

1498.6669

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

