**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Banking
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/) > Credit unions

#  Credit unions

  * Introduction 
  * Savings 
  * Current accounts 
  * Loans 
  * Nominating a beneficiary if you die 
  * Regulation 
  * Complaints 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Credit unions are financial co-operatives where members can save and lend to
each other at fair rates of interest. They are non-profit organisations that
have a volunteer ethos and community focus.

You can become a member of a credit union if you have a common bond with other
members. The most usual common bonds are:

  * **Community bond:** members live or work in the same area 
  * **Occupational bond:** members are in the same profession or work for the same employer 
  * **Associational bond:** members are in the same society or association 

Each credit union is owned by its members, who each have one vote. The
membership elects individual members to the board of directors of the credit
union.

There are two main umbrella bodies for credit unions - the [ Irish League of
Credit Unions (ILCU) ](https://www.creditunion.ie/) and the [ Credit Union
Development Association (CUDA) ](https://www.cuda.ie/) . Most credit unions
belong to one of these bodies. These bodies may have other rules their members
must follow and they provide other services to credit unions.

##  Savings

Credit unions in Ireland are covered by the [ Deposit Guarantee Scheme
](https://www.depositguarantee.ie) which is administered by the Central Bank
of Ireland. This is a scheme that can compensate depositors if a credit
institution is forced to go out of business. It covers deposits held with
banks, building societies and credit unions. The Deposit Guarantee Scheme
protects up to €100,000 of your deposits in each institution.

####  Dividends

Your credit union may declare a dividend at the end of each year. As credit
unions are not-for-profit, any income generated is returned to members in the
form of a dividend, or may be used to improve and enhance services. The return
on savings will vary from credit union to credit union, depending on the
surplus income available at the end of the year.

####  Savings and tax

Interest you earn on deposits in credit unions is subject to [ Deposit
Interest Retention Tax (DIRT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-
investments/deposit-interest-retention-tax/) . There are specific rules about
how credit union dividends are taxed, depending on the type of account you
hold.

##  Current accounts

Many credit unions provide current account services to their members. Services
include debit cards, direct debits and overdraft facilities. You can [ check
if your credit union offers current accounts
](https://www.creditunion.ie/what-we-offer/current-account/) .

##  Loans

Credit unions can make loans to members. For example, loans may be for:

  * Car purchase 
  * Home improvement 
  * Education 
  * Holidays 
  * Bridging loans 
  * Special occasions, weddings or Christmas 
  * Medical or emergencies 

The credit union may require security for the loan – this depends on the
credit union’s own rules.

The minimum and maximum loan amount is set locally by each credit union.

The maximum repayment term on unsecured loans is 10 years and on secured loans
is 35 years.

Your ability to repay the loan is taken into account when you apply for a
loan. Each loan application is assessed on an individual basis, in line with
lending regulations and the credit union’s lending policy.

The credit union must have an appeals process in place for a member who is
refused a loan.

The rate of interest charged on the loans is decided by the board of
directors. The interest on the loan may not be more than 1% per month.

Some credit unions offer the [ It Makes Sense ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/loans-and-credit/microcredit-loans/) loan, which provides small loans
at low interest rates. The loan may be available if you are getting a social
welfare payment and are having difficulty getting credit from other sources.
You can get a list of participating credit unions on the [ It Makes Sense Loan
website ](https://itmakessenseloan.ie/) .

Many credit unions offer mortgages. The interest rate charged is set by each
credit union at local level and each credit union also sets the maximum value
of mortgage which it provides. You can check a list of [ local credit unions
that provide mortgages ](https://www.creditunion.ie/what-we-offer/mortgages/)
.

The Central Bank's [ Credit Union Handbook
](http://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-sectors/credit-
unions/Pages/Credit%20Union%20Handbook.aspx) includes guidance for credit
unions on various aspects of lending.

####  Loan protection insurance

Loan protection insurance may be available on loans to borrowing members.

####  Difficulty repaying your loan

If you have difficulties repaying your loan, you should contact your credit
union to discuss your situation.

##  Nominating a beneficiary if you die

You can make a written statement nominating someone to get your property in
the credit union when you die, for example, your savings or insurance.

The property will not then be part of your estate for the purposes of your
will or intestacy. This means the nominated person can access the funds
without waiting for the legal processes to be completed.

The maximum amount that may be nominated is €27,000.

A completed nomination must be signed and witnessed. You can change your
nomination at any time.

##  Regulation

The main legislation governing credit unions is the [ Credit Union Act 1997
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1997/act/15/front/revised/en/html) .
Credit unions are also subject to various aspects of the Central Bank Acts as
well as, for example, anti-money laundering and data protection legislation.

The [ Registry of Credit Unions
](http://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-sectors/credit-
unions/Pages/default.aspx) , which is part of the [ Central Bank of Ireland
](https://www.centralbank.ie/) , is responsible for the registration,
regulation and supervision of credit unions.

The Central Bank has the power to impose conditions on the registration of a
credit union. These conditions may be appealed to the [ Irish Financial
Services Appeals Tribunal ](http://www.ifsat.ie/) . Regulatory decisions may
also be appealed to this tribunal.

The main function of the Registrar of Credit Unions is to regulate credit
unions to:

  * Protect members' savings in each credit union 
  * Maintain the financial stability and wellbeing of credit unions generally 

Credit unions who want to engage in certain types of business, for example,
insurance, investment intermediary, and certain payment services must get
authorisation from the Central Bank.

The Central Bank publishes the [ Credit Union Handbook
](http://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-sectors/credit-
unions/Pages/Credit%20Union%20Handbook.aspx) which sets out various legal and
regulatory requirements and guidance for credit unions.

####  Prudential requirements

Credit unions must meet the prudential requirements set by the Central Bank in
relation to reserves, minimum liquidity requirements, investments, lending and
borrowing.

##  Complaints

Credit unions must have a complaints procedure in place.

If you are not satisfied with the outcome of the internal procedure, you can
complain to the [ Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman
](/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-about-financial-services/) .

The Ombudsman is an independent officer whose remit is to investigate, mediate
and adjudicate unresolved complaints of individual customers about financial
service providers and pension providers.

##  Where to apply

To find a credit union you can join, you can use the [ credit union locator
](https://www.creditunion.ie/credit-union-locator/) provided by the Irish
League of Credit Unions.

###  Irish League of Credit Unions

33-41 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6146700

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6146701

**Homepage:** [ http://www.creditunion.ie ](http://www.creditunion.ie)

**Email:** [ info@creditunion.ie ](mailto:info@creditunion.ie)

###  Credit Union Development Association

Unit 3013 Lake Drive  
Citywest Business Park  
Dublin 24  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 4693348

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 4693346

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cuda.ie ](http://www.cuda.ie)

**Email:** [ info@cuda.ie ](mailto:info@cuda.ie)

###  Registry of Credit Unions

Central Bank of Ireland  
PO Box 559  
Dublin 1  
Ireland  

**Tel:** (01) 224 4228

**Homepage:** [ http://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-sectors/credit-
unions/Pages/default.aspx ](http://www.centralbank.ie/regulation/industry-
sectors/credit-unions/Pages/default.aspx)

**Email:** [ rcu@centralbank.ie ](mailto:rcu@centralbank.ie)

_**Page edited:** 6 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-
unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Credit%20unions&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-
unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Credit%20unions&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-unions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mortgage interest tax credit_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/mortgage-interest-relief/)

A mortgage interest tax credit or relief is a tax relief based on the amount
of qualifying mortgage interest that you pay in a tax year for your home. A
new temporary mortgage interest tax credit was announced in Budget 2024. The
previous scheme ended on 1 January 2021.

1025.291

  * [ _Advertising of credit_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/credit-advertising/)

There are detailed rules governing the advertising of financial services and
credit. The Central Bank of Ireland monitors compliance with these rules.

962.4508

  * [ _Trade unions_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/industrial-relations-and-trade-unions/trade-unions/)

You have a right under the Constitution to join a trade union. Find out about
trade unions, including what they are and the benefits of being a trade union
member.

945.61395

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

