**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Loans and credit
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/) > Overdrafts

#  Overdrafts

  * Introduction 
  * How an overdraft works 
  * Fees and charges 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

You can apply to your bank or credit union [KD1] for an overdraft on your
current account.

When there is no money in your account, an overdraft allows you to continue to
spend up to a certain amount, known as the ‘overdraft limit’.

You have to pay back what you spend from your overdraft, plus interest. The
interest rate on overdrafts is usually higher than on personal loans. You can
reduce the amount of interest you pay by using less than the limit and
repaying the overdraft before it is due.

##  How an overdraft works

Before you use an overdraft, you should apply to your bank or credit union to
make an overdraft available. This is called having an overdraft facility.

There will be a limit to the amount of the overdraft. How much of an overdraft
you get usually depends on how well you have managed your account in the past.
For example, the bank or credit union will check whether you pay your bills
regularly and pay off your credit card debt every month. If you have a bad [
credit history ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-
credit-history/) , you may find it difficult to get an overdraft.

The bank or credit union will set a time limit for the overdraft to be fully
repaid. The overdraft is paid back to the bank when money is put into your
account. If you do not repay the overdraft in the agreed time, it can affect
your credit history and make it harder to get loans or overdrafts in future.

###  What if I can’t pay back an overdraft?

Ask the bank or credit union for more time to pay back what you owe. It is
likely to agree to a time extension if you have paid off your debts in the
past.

If you still cannot pay back the overdraft and are getting further into debt,
contact MABS (the [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/mabs-service/) ). MABS will help you work out how
much money you can afford to pay back per month. It will then contact the bank
or credit union for you. MABS will arrange with the bank or credit union that
you will pay back a certain amount every month until the debt is cleared. MABS
offers this service free of charge.

##  Fees and charges

Many banks and credit unions charge a fee for setting up an overdraft and an
annual fee to continue it.

You pay interest on the amount you owe at any one time, not on the total
overdraft limit available to you. The interest rate on overdrafts is usually
higher than the rate charged on personal loans. The rate can change.

##  How to apply

Contact your bank or credit union to apply for an overdraft.

_**Page edited:** 1 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/overdrafts/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Overdrafts&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/overdrafts/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/overdrafts/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Overdrafts&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/overdrafts/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Managing your money when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-finances/organising-your-finances-on-your-return/)

This page has information on organising your finances when you return to
Ireland, including transfer of pensions and social insurance and benefits from
abroad.

1030.7136

  * [ _Tax on income that is not from your employer_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-return-non-paye-income/)

Some PAYE taxpayers have other sources of income. Information about how non-
PAYE income is taxed.

995.43304

  * [ _Switching your bank account_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/switching-your-bank-account/)

Find out how to switch your bank account to a different bank.

902.2731

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

