**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax/) > Online services for PAYE taxpayers

#  Online services for PAYE taxpayers

  * Introduction 
  * PAYE services 
  * Jobs and Pensions service 
  * How to apply 
  * Contact 

##  Introduction

If you have tax deducted from your income by your employer, you are a PAYE
taxpayer. You can use Revenue's myAccount service to access PAYE Online
Services. You can also register a first job or private pension online.

Revenue's [ myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) service is
a single access point for secure online services.

For self-employed people, businesses and tax professionals, Revenue has an
online service called [ ROS (Revenue Online Service) ](https://www.ros.ie/ros-
registration-web/ros-registration) .

##  PAYE services

If you are a PAYE taxpayer, you can access PAYE Services via myAccount. When
you [ register for myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-
web/register.html?execution=e2s1) , you can:

  * View your tax record 
  * Claim a range of [ tax credits ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)
  * Apply for refunds of tax including health expenses 
  * Declare additional income 
  * Request a review of tax liability for previous years 
  * Re-allocate credits between [ yourself and your spouse or civil partner ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/)
  * Apply for the [ Help to Buy ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-scheme/) scheme 
  * File or pay your [ Local Property Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax/)
  * Estimate the cost of Vehicle Registration Tax 
  * Track correspondence submitted to Revenue 
  * View and print your [ Employment Detail Summary ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/employment-detail-summary/)
  * View COVID-19 support payments you got in 2020: [ ERS ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/news/articles/employer-covid-19-refund-scheme.aspx) , [ TWSS ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/covid19-temporary-wage-subsidy-scheme/) or [ PUP ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-payment/)
  * Review your [ Preliminary End-Of-Year Statement ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-review-your-paye-tax/)
  * Record and manage receipts for your expenses 

You do not have to submit paper claims when you submit a transaction through
myAccount. However, you must keep receipts for 6 years as Revenue may ask to
view them at a later stage. You can keep an electronic record of your receipts
on myAccount using [ Revenue’s receipts tracker service
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/common/manage-your-
receipts-with-receipts-tracker.aspx) .

When a transaction is submitted using myAccount, it will be immediately
acknowledged and a permanent record of the transaction will be recorded.

PAYE Services are available for the current year and the previous 4 years.

##  Jobs and Pensions service

If you are [ starting work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-
job/starting-work/tax-and-starting-work/) , the [ Jobs and Pensions online
service ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/paye-
services/add-job-pension.aspx) in myAccount allows you to register your first
job or private pension with Revenue. It is also available in ROS.

When you register your job or pension, Revenue will provide you with a [ Tax
Credit Certificate ](how_your_tax_is_calculated.en.html#l11dac) that shows
your rate of tax and tax credits. Revenue will provide your new employer or
pension provider with a Revenue Payroll Notification so that they know how
much tax to deduct from your wages or pension.

When you finish work with an employer, they will let Revenue know that the
employment has ended (you can also use the Jobs and Pensions service to do
this yourself). Your new employer should then register your next job – you
only use the service to register your first job in Ireland.

Revenue has information on [ how to access the Jobs and Pensions service
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/paye-services/add-job-
pension.aspx) .

##  How to apply

To access PAYE Services online you must register with [ Revenue's myAccount
Service ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) .

##  Contact

For more information and support, see the [ Revenue myAccount help guides
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/support/help-
guides/myaccount/index.aspx) .

If you have a problem registering for myAccount, you can email [
RegisterForMyAccount@revenue.ie ](mailto:RegisterForMyAccount@revenue.ie) or
phone (01) 738 3691.

_**Page edited:** 31 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/online-services-for-paye-
taxpayers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Online%20services%20for%20PAYE%20taxpayers&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/online-services-for-paye-
taxpayers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/online-services-for-paye-
taxpayers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Online%20services%20for%20PAYE%20taxpayers&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/online-services-for-paye-
taxpayers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to review your tax for PAYE taxpayers_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-review-your-paye-tax/)

How to check if you have paid the right amount of tax and what to do if you
have paid too much or too little.

2473.359

  * [ _Applying for social welfare payments and services online_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

1469.9979

  * [ _Your rights if you bought online on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-online-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something online on or
before 28 November 2022.

1394.4824

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

