**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Tax credits and reliefs for
people over 65

#  Tax credits and reliefs for people over 65

  * Introduction 
  * Tax exemption limits for people aged 65 or over 
  * Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT) exemption 
  * Tax credits 
  * Medical expenses 
  * Nursing home costs 
  * Home nursing 
  * Employing a home carer 
  * Deeds of covenant 
  * Tax credits and reliefs for people with a disability 

##  Introduction

If you or your spouse or civil partner are over 65 years of age, you can get
the Age Tax Credit.

If your income is below a certain limit, you are exempt from income tax and
from Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT).

This page also gives an overview of other tax reliefs that may be relevant to
you.

These include tax relief on:

  * Medical expenses 
  * Nursing home costs 
  * The cost of a home carer or home nursing 
  * Deeds of covenant 

There is [ pension tax relief ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/) on pension contributions and
retirement lump sums.

If you are getting a pension or social welfare payment, you can read about [
how pensions are taxed ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/pensions/taxation-of-pensions/) and [ how social welfare
payments are taxed ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/) .

##  Tax exemption limits for people aged 65 or over

If you are 65 or over, you do not have to pay income tax if your income is
below a certain amount called the exemption limit.

The exemption limit also applies if:

  * You are under 65 but your spouse or civil partner is 65 or over and 
  * You are [ jointly assessed for tax ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/#0b1920)

**Annual exemption limits** **Personal circumstances** |  **Exemption limit €**  
---|---  
Single, widowed or surviving civil partner  |  18,000   
Married or in a civil partnership  |  36,000   
First 2 children  |  575 each   
Subsequent children  |  830 each   
  
The exemption is for income tax only. It does not apply to [ Pay Related
Social Insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/) or [ Universal Social Charge (USC) ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) . However, you do not pay
PRSI if you are over 70.

If your income is below the exemption limit, you are also exempt from Deposit
Interest Retention Tax (DIRT).

####  Marginal relief for income above the exemption limit

If your income is above the exemption limit, but is less than twice the
exemption limit, you can get marginal relief. Under marginal relief, you are
only taxed on the amount over the exemption limit. However, that amount is
taxed at 40% and you get no tax credits.

Marginal relief will only apply if it benefits you more than the usual [
method of calculating tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-
calculated/) .

[ You can find more information about income tax exemptions and marginal
relief on Revenue's website ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/marital-and-civil-status/exemption-and-marginal-
relief/index.aspx) .

##  Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT) exemption

[ Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-on-
savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-tax/) is deducted from
interest paid on deposit or savings accounts.

If you or your spouse or civil partner are over 65, you do not have to pay
DIRT if your income is below the  income exemption limit  .

####  How to apply

To apply to have your deposit interest paid to you without DIRT being
deducted, send a completed [ Form DE1 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-incomes/documents/dirt/form-de1.pdf) to
your bank or credit union.

If DIRT is already deducted from your deposit interest, you can apply for a
refund by sending a completed [ Form 54 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-
incomes/documents/dirt/form54-claims.pdf) to Revenue.

##  Tax credits

Tax credits reduce the amount of tax that you must pay. After [ calculating
your tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) , the
amount of your tax credits is deducted from the amount of tax you owe.

Everyone is entitled to a personal tax credit. There are personal tax credits
for:

  * Single people 
  * People who are married or in a civil partnership 
  * People who are widowed or are surviving civil partners 

You are also entitled to the [ Employee Tax Credit
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-
and-employment/employee-tax-credit/index.aspx) if you are:

  * Still working 
  * Getting a pension 
  * Getting a [ taxable social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

If you are self-employed, you get the [ Earned Income Tax Credit
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/income-and-employment/earned-income-credit/index.aspx) .

The amount of each tax credit is listed in a [ table of the main tax credits
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-
and-reliefs/introduction-to-income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/#f04cad) .

###  Age Tax Credit

If you or your spouse or civil partner are over 65, you can get the [ Age Tax
Credit ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/age-tax-credit/index.aspx) .

**Age Tax Credit** **Personal circumstances** |  **Amount of credit €**  
---|---  
Single or widowed or surviving civil partner  |  245   
Married or in a civil partnership  |  490   
  
###  **Dependent Relative Tax Credit**

If you maintain a dependent relative, you may qualify for the Dependent
Relative Tax Credit. Maintaining a relative means meeting the costs of
everyday living.

The relative you claim for must be related to you, or to your spouse or civil
partner, and be a:

  * Parent who is widowed or is a surviving civil partner 
  * Son or daughter who lives with you and who you depend on because of your ill health or old age 
  * Relative who cannot maintain themselves due to age or illness 

To qualify for the tax credit, the income of your relative must be below a
limit.

[ Read more about the Dependent Relative Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/dependent-
relative-tax-credit/) and how to apply for it.

##  Medical expenses

You can claim income tax back on many medical expenses. Tax relief for most
expenses is at the standard rate of tax.

You can claim tax relief on medical expenses you pay for yourself or for
someone else.

Read about the [ medical expenses that qualify for tax relief ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-expenses/) and how
to claim the tax relief.

##  Nursing home costs

You can claim tax relief on the cost of a nursing home with 24-hour on-site
nursing care, which you pay for yourself or for someone else.

This relief applies at the highest rate of income tax you pay. The higher rate
of income tax is 40% and applies to any income that is above the [ standard
rate cut-off point ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/#d43041) . The standard rate of
20% applies to income below the cut-off point.

The nursing home expenses you pay are deducted from your total income. This
reduces the amount of your income that is taxable at the higher rate, if any,
before reducing the amount taxed at the standard rate. Revenue provides
examples of [ tax relief on nursing home expenses
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/nursing-home-and-additional-nursing-
care-expenses.aspx) .

If you have a loan under the [ Fair Deal Nursing Home Loan
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-
services-for-older-people/fair-deal-scheme/#5ed1d3) , you or your estate can
claim tax relief when the loan is repaid. This is usually when you sell the
asset that was used as security or after your death.

##  Home nursing

You can claim tax relief on the cost of [ employing a qualified nurse at home
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/employing-a-carer/health-expenses-for-home-
nursing.aspx) . Tax relief for nursing at home is [ claimed as a medical
expense ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-
medical-expenses/) and applies at the standard rate of tax.

##  Employing a home carer

You can claim income tax relief on the cost of employing a carer for yourself
or for another family member who is disabled and needs a carer.

The tax relief applies at the highest rate of income tax you pay, up to a
maximum amount.

Read more about [ tax relief on employing a home carer ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-for-
employing-a-home-carer/) and how to claim it.

##  Deeds of covenant

A deed of covenant is a written legal agreement for one person to pay another
person an amount without getting any benefit in return.

If you pay tax at the [ higher rate of income tax
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-
tax-is-calculated/#354b71) , you can benefit from tax relief on a deed of
covenant.

To qualify for tax relief, it must be a deed of covenant to:

  * Someone who is over 65 (this relief is limited to 5% of your total income) 
  * An adult who is permanently incapacitated 
  * A minor who is permanently incapacitated but is not your child 

Read more about the rules for [ tax relief on deeds of covenant ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/deeds-of-covenant/) .

##  Tax credits and reliefs for people with a disability

There are several [ tax credits and reliefs for people with a disability
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/)
.

They include:

  * VAT refunds on aids and appliances used by people with disabilities 
  * Tax reliefs for people with a visual impairment 
  * Tax relief for drivers and passengers with disabilities 
  * Tax relief on assistance dogs 

_**Page edited:** 7 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20credits%20and%20reliefs%20for%20people%20over%2065&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20credits%20and%20reliefs%20for%20people%20over%2065&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Housing tax credits and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

You can claim tax relief on some housing expenses and income. Find out more.

2632.9197

  * [ _Income tax credits and reliefs following a death_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/)

An explanation of the tax credits that apply when someone dies and the tax
reliefs for their spouse or civil partner.

2485.7522

  * [ _Employment tax credits and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/employment-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

There are a number of tax credits and reliefs available to those in
employment.

2417.6067

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

