**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Moving to Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/) > [ Rights of
residence in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-
residence-in-ireland/) > Residence rights of family members

#  Residence rights of family members

  * Introduction 
  * Family members of Irish citizens 
  * Family members of UK citizens 
  * Family members of EU, EEA and Swisscitizens 
  * People who have internationalprotection status 
  * Other Non-EEA citizens 
  * Dependent elderly relatives 
  * Further information and contacts 

##  Introduction

If you move to Ireland you may be able to bring your Non-EEA family members to
live with you. Your right to have your family join you in Ireland depends on:

  * Your residence status in Ireland 
  * Your family relationship with the person 

In some cases, you have a legal right to be joined by your family. But in many
situations, you must show that you have the income to support them and satisfy
eligibility criteria. The information on this page is mostly about spouses,
partners and dependent children.

##  Family members of Irish citizens

You do not have an automatic right to be joined by your family if they are
non-EEA nationals. If your family member is an EEA, Swiss or UK national, they
do not have to apply for residence permission.

###  Spouses from outside the EEA, UK and Switzerland

If you are [ returning to Ireland with your spouse ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-non-eea-
spouse/) , they may [ need an entry visa ](/en/moving-country/visas-for-
ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-ireland/) . They should apply for a
long stay (D) visa. Your income in the 3 years before the application should
be more than €40,000 in total, not including any social welfare payments you
received during that period.

After they arrive on a long stay visa, or if they are from a country that
allows them to travel to Ireland without a visa, you should both go to your
immigration registration office to apply for [ permission to reside
](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-
ireland/registration-of-non-eea-nationals-in-ireland/) in Ireland.

If your spouse is already resident in Ireland (for example, if they have a
student visa), they should make an appointment to go to their immigration
registration office to apply for residence as the spouse of an Irish citizen.

But if your spouse lives in Ireland but does not have permission to live here,
they must make an application by [ filling in a form
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Application-for-
permission-to-remain-in-the-State-on-the-basis-of-marriage-civil-
partnership.pdf) and sending supporting documents to Immigration Service
Delivery (ISD). This also applies if your spouse is an international
protection applicant.

###  Partners

If you are [ returning to Ireland with your de facto non-EEA partner
](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-
with-your-de-facto-partner/) , they must [ apply for a visa or preclearance
](/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-
ireland/) before coming to Ireland. A de facto partner is a person you are in
a relationship with that is like a marriage, but you are not married.

If you are in a de facto relationship with someone who is already resident in
Ireland (for example, if they have a student visa) they can [ apply for
residence based on their relationship ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-
situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-ireland/de-facto-partner-of-an-irish-
or-non-eea-national/#submit-application) with you. You are eligible to apply
if you have been in a relationship for 2 years or more.

Applications from de facto partners who are living in Ireland without a valid
residence permission in Ireland are not accepted.

###  Parents of Irish citizen children

Parents of Irish citizen children can apply for residence. If the parent is
outside of Ireland, they may need a visa to come to Ireland.

To qualify for residence you must be the biological parent of an Irish citizen
child (and named on the child’s birth certificate) and you must be involved in
the child’s upbringing. The child must live in Ireland and be under 18.

If you already live in Ireland and have a valid immigration permission (for
example, you are in Ireland with a student visa or an employment permit), or
you have entered Ireland on a ‘D Reside Parent of an Irish citizen child’
visa, you should go to your local registration office with your child and
bring the following documents:

  * Your passport 
  * Your Irish Residence Permit (IRP) 
  * Your child’s Irish passport 
  * Your child’s birth certificate 
  * Proof of your address 
  * Proof of your child’s address 

If you are in Ireland and do not have immigration permission, or you came to
Ireland on a short stay visa, you must [ complete an application form
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Irish-citizen-
child-application-form.pdf) and post it with supporting documents to the
address noted in the form.

###  Children

Children under 16 do not need to register with ISD. If they plan to join you
in Ireland, they may need to apply for a visa to enter the country.

If you have [ children aged between 16 and 18
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-
ireland/family-dependents/) , or under 23 and in fulltime education, they must
register with ISD if they are not Irish, British, Swiss or EEA citizens.

##  Family members of UK citizens

If your family member was living in Ireland before 31 December 2020 and has an
Irish Residence Permit (IRP) that was granted based on their relationship with
you, they can continue to live in Ireland. The IRP should say Stamp 4 EUFAM.
They must exchange this IRP before 30 June 2022.

Non-EEA and non-UK [ family members of UK citizens ](/en/government-in-
ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/residence-rules-UK-citizens#l5a1aa) who move to
Ireland from 1 January 2021, must apply for residency. They do not have an
automatic right of residence in Ireland.

You should [ check if they need a visa ](/en/moving-country/visas-for-
ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-ireland/) for entering the State. If
they do not need a visa, they must apply for preclearance before travelling to
Ireland if they plan to make an application for residence.

##  Family members of EU, EEA and Swisscitizens

If your family members are also EU/EEA, Swiss or UK citizens, then you do not
have to make an application for them to join you here in Ireland. They do not
have to register with Immigration Service Delivery (the Irish immigration
authorities).

If your family members are non EU/EEA, Swiss or UK citizens, they must [ apply
for residence ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-
ireland/residence-rights-eu-national#lf4896) .

###  Qualifying and permitted family members

In EU law, there are 2 types of family member who can apply for a residence
card: qualifying family members and permitted family members.

The following are **qualifying family members** :

  * Your spouse or civil partner 
  * Your child or the child of your spouse under the age of 21 
  * Your grandchild or your spouse’s grandchild under the age of 21 
  * Your dependent parent, or dependent parent of your spouse 
  * Your dependent grandparent, or the dependent grandparent of your spouse 
  * Other direct, dependent descendants or direct, dependent relatives in the ascending line (for example, great grandparents or great grandchildren) of either you or your spouse 

Children over 21 are generally considered qualifying family members if they
are in education, or are dependent on you due to an illness or disability. You
will have to show that your parents or grandparents (or the parents or
grandparents of your spouse) were dependent on you before they came to
Ireland.

**Permitted family members** include:

  * Your partner 
  * Any relative who is part of your household that is not a qualifying family member 
  * Any relative who needs your personal care because of illness or disability 

You can read about [ residence rights of EEA citizens and their families
](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-
ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/) .

##  People who have internationalprotection status

If you were granted international protection (either refugee or subsidiary
protection status) or you came to Ireland as a programme refugee, you have a [
right to family reunification ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/family-reunification-for-refugees-
in-ireland/) .

You can apply for the following family members to join you in Ireland:

  * Your spouse or civil partner 
  * Your children aged under 18 
  * Your parents if you are under 18 

##  Other Non-EEA citizens

You may be able to invite your family to live with you in Ireland depending on
the type of residence permission you have.

###  Critical Skills Employment Permit holders

If you have a [ Critical Skills Employment Permit ](/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/green-card-permits/) , your
spouse or partner, and your dependent family can apply to join you immediately

###  Students

If you are studying in Ireland, your family cannot join you in Ireland except
in exceptional circumstances.

###  Employment permit holders and Stamp 4 holders

If you have an [ employment permit ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/overview-employment-permits/) (other than a
Critical Skills Employment Permit) or a Stamp 4, then your family can apply to
join you in Ireland after 12 months. The [ policy of Immigration Service
Delivery (ISD) (pdf) ](http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/INIS/Family Reunification
Policy Document.pdf/Files/Family Reunification Policy Document.pdf) is to
assess each application on its own merits, and you do not have a right to be
joined by your family.

You should have enough income to support your family. If your spouse or
partner wants to join you in Ireland, you should have earned at least €30,000
per year in the 2 years before the application.

For children, the amount you should earn is based on the weekly [ Working
Family Payment income limits ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-to-families-and-children/family-income-
supplement#l2b73a) for your family size.

##  Dependent elderly relatives

If your parents, or other elderly relative that is dependent on you or your
spouse or partner, wish to join you in Ireland, you must have:

  * Income of €60,000 per year for one relative 
  * Income of €75,000 for two relatives 

Both your income and that of your spouse or partner is considered. Having the
income does not guarantee that permission will be granted. You can read about
the other requirements for [ elderly dependent relatives
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-join-family-in-ireland/joining-a-
non-eea-non-swiss-national/dependent-elderly-relative/) on the ISD website.

##  Further information and contacts

You can read more about non-EEA family reunification in the [ policy
guidelines (pdf)
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Family%20Reunification%20Policy%20Document.pdf/Files/Family%20Reunification%20Policy%20Document.pdf)
.

###  EU Treaty Rights Application Unit

Department of Justice

Residence Division  
Immigration Service Delivery  
13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
D02 XK70  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-join-family-in-
ireland/joining-an-eea-or-swiss-national/eu-treaty-rights/
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-join-family-in-ireland/joining-an-
eea-or-swiss-national/eu-treaty-rights/)

**Email:** [ eutreatyrights@justice.ie ](mailto:eutreatyrights@justice.ie)

###  Burgh Quay Registration Office

Immigration Service Delivery

Department of Justice  
13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
D02 XK70  
Ireland

**Email:** [ immigrationsupport@justice.ie
](mailto:immigrationsupport@justice.ie)

_**Page edited:** 2 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Residence%20rights%20of%20family%20members&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Residence%20rights%20of%20family%20members&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1509.2955

  * [ _Employment permits and family members_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/spousal-work-permit-scheme/)

Information about which emloyment permit holders are allowed to bring their
family to Ireland, and how those family members can apply to live and work.

1312.2222

  * [ _Returning to Ireland to care for a family member_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-to-care-for-a-family-member/)

This page includes information on returning to Ireland to care for a family
member.

1213.4756

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

