**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Debt ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/) > Overview of problem debt

#  Overview of problem debt

  * Introduction 
  * Getting help from MABS 
  * Personal insolvency options 
  * What you can do yourself 
  * Understanding words used aboutdebt 
  * Rules for collecting debts 

##  Introduction

If you owe money and you are not able to keep up with the repayments, the debt
can become a problem. If you are in this situation you may find yourself:

  * Missing payments and getting letters from creditors 
  * Borrowing money to pay bills and catch up with arrears 
  * Making promises to pay unreasonable amounts 
  * Facing legal action 

It is important to take action to deal with your debts and stop the situation
getting worse. For example, if you don’t start getting your debts under
control, your creditors could go to court and eventually [ repossess your home
](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/home-repossession/) . This can
happen even if you have no mortgage on your home or your mortgage payments are
up to date.

##  Getting help from MABS

The [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/mabs-service/) is a free and confidential service for people with
debt problems and money management problems. MABS can help you to explore your
options and deal with your debt in a systematic way. Its website [ mabs.ie
](https://www.mabs.ie/en/) provides information and resources.

You can use the [ My Financial Healthcheck ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-
financial-healthcheck/) tool as a starting point to find the right
information, advice and support.

**Managing your money:** MABS can help you manage your money and stay on top
of your bills. You can [ use the MyBudget tool ](http://mabs.ie/money-
tools/my-budget/) to help you make a budget plan. There are also [ tips on
managing your money ](https://mabs.ie/managing-money/) to make your money go
further.

**Dealing with creditors:** MABS has agreed a protocol with the Banking and
Payments Federation of Ireland (BPFI). The lenders that have signed up to the
protocol have committed to work with MABS money advisers to help customers
with their debt problems and agree a sustainable plan of repayments. The [
protocol between MABS and BPFI (pdf) ](https://bpfi.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/BPFI_MABS_Operational_Protocol_May2023.pdf) allows for
write-off of some debt, at the lender’s discretion.

MABS can also help you to agree a sustainable repayment plan with your other
creditors that have not signed up to the protocol.

**Accessing personal insolvency options:** All MABS services are registered as
Approved Intermediaries with the Insolvency Service of Ireland (ISI) and can
bring you through the process of getting a [ Debt Relief Notice ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-notices/) if
this is an appropriate solution for you. MABS can also advise you on how to
access the other personal insolvency options – see below.

**Dealing with mortgage arrears:** MABS has Dedicated Mortgage Arrears (DMA)
advisers that can give you independent expert advice if you have difficulty
with mortgage arrears. DMA advisers can help you find out what type of
financial, insolvency or legal services you need and help you to access them.

MABS is involved in providing free support to people with mortgage arrears, as
part of the [ Abhaile ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-
mortgage-arrears-support/) scheme. [ Abhaile can offer financial and legal
support and advice ](https://mabs.ie/abhaile/about-abhaile/) .

**Contacting MABS:** You can call the MABS Helpline on 0818 07 2000 from 9am
to 8pm, Monday to Friday. You can also [ request a callback
](https://mabs.ie/contact/call-back/) , email [ helpline@mabs.ie
](mailto:helpline@mabs.ie) or make an appointment to meet a money adviser in
person in one of the nationwide [ network of MABS offices
](https://mabs.ie/about/find-a-mabs-office) .

##  Personal insolvency options

There are 3 [ personal insolvency options ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/) for people who
cannot afford to pay their personal and mortgage debts.

The Insolvency Service of Ireland (ISI) administers these debt resolution
processes.

The ISI also provides the website [ backontrack.ie ](http://backontrack.ie/) ,
with information on the insolvency options and dealing with debt. You can use
the website to request a callback, or you can call the ISI’s helpline at (01)
764 4200.

##  What you can do yourself

MABS provides [ Money Tools ](http://www.mabs.ie/money-tools/) that can help
you:

  * Manage your money 
  * Find out if you are in difficulty and where to get help 
  * Make a plan to deal with debts 

You can use the [ My Budget ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-budget/) tool to
help you work out a budget plan. It shows you how much money you have coming
in and going out over a year and shows how much is left over or by how much
you are short. MABS has advice on [ managing your money
](https://mabs.ie/managing-money/) to make it go further.

If you are not sure whether you are in financial difficulty yet, you can use
the MABS tool [ My Financial Healthcheck ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-
financial-healthcheck/) to find the information, advice and support you need.

If you want to work out a plan to tackle one or more debts, you can use the
MABS tool [ My Full Financial Picture ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/full-
financial-picture/) . It shows how much money you have coming in and going out
and how much is left over or short for paying bills and debts. It includes
space to record bills, credit, assets and debts, giving you a total debt
figure.

The information you gather with these tools will help you to take the next
steps.

[ Read about the 5 steps you can take to deal with your debt
](https://mabs.ie/tackling-debt/five-steps/) .

##  Understanding words used aboutdebt

There are different types of debt, including mortgages, loans, overdrafts,
credit cards and hire purchase agreements. Some debts, for example, mortgages,
are _secured_ . This means that goods or property, usually your house, is used
as security in case the debt is not paid. Find out more about types of debt
and the words used about debt in our [ glossary of debt terms ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/glossary-of-debt-terms/) .

##  Rules for collecting debts

Some debts have specific rules and practices in place in relation to how they
are managed and collected. These are mainly debts which are owed to the State
or a State body. In particular, taxes, social welfare overpayments, local
authority rents and housing loans, utility bills and TV licences all have
specific rules and procedures. Find out more about the [ rules for specific
debts ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/) .

There are general rules under consumer credit legislation in relation to [
collecting debts ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debt-collection/) ,
including rules in relation to privacy, contact points and harassment and
intimidation. There is a particular [ code of conduct ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/) for how
lenders must engage with people in mortgage arrears or pre-arrears.

If you do not engage with your lender, your lender will most likely initiate [
legal proceedings to recover the debt ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/court-procedures/) . The case can be taken in the District Court,
Circuit Court or High Court, depending on the amount of money involved. Once
your lender has a Court judgment setting out the debt, this [ judgment can be
enforced in various ways ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) , including, in extreme cases,
through [ bankruptcy proceedings ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/what-is-bankruptcy/) . Being in arrears on
debt repayments can also have other consequences, for example, it can affect
your [ credit record ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/your-credit-history/) and make it difficult to get credit in the
future.

When someone has died, there are detailed rules about [ how their debts must
be dealt with ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debts-after-death/) .

_**Page edited:** 14 June 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Overview%20of%20problem%20debt&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-
debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Overview%20of%20problem%20debt&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Overview of mortgage debt_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-debt/)

Information for people facing mortgage arrears.

1386.7261

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

1250.2817

  * [ _What happens to debts after death?_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/debts-after-death/)

Explains what happens to debts after a debtor has died.

1130.2534

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

