**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Moving to Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/) > [ Coming to live
in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/)
> Support services for foreign nationals in Ireland

#  Support services for foreign nationals in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Support for visitors and tourists 
  * Immigration advice 
  * Other organisations that can help 
  * Contacts 

##  Introduction

This page has information on organisations in Ireland that can give you
information and advice about immigration or other difficulties you might have.

##  Support for visitors and tourists

###  Irish Tourist Assistance Service (ITAS)

[ ITAS ](https://itas.ie/) is a free nationwide service offering support and
assistance to tourists who are victims of crime, or experience other traumatic
events while visiting Ireland. It can help you replace travel documents, help
with language difficulties, deal with medical needs, arrange accommodation or
meals if needed and help to replace stolen travel tickets.

ITAS **does not provide financial assistance** to victims of crime, replace
lost or stolen items or offer legal or insurance advice.

###  Foreign embassies and consulates

There are many [ foreign embassies and consulates
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) in Ireland that provide consular
services to nationals of their country. These services include advice and
practical help with travel documentation. If you lose your passport or travel
documentation when you are in Ireland, your country’s embassy or consulate can
give you a temporary travel document. Your embassy or consulate can also help
if you:

  * Have a medical emergency 
  * Are a victim of crime 
  * Are arrested or accused of a crime 

##  Immigration advice

The organisations below can give you information and advice about immigration.

###  Immigrant Council of Ireland

The [ Immigration Council of Ireland (ICI) ](https://www.immigrantcouncil.ie/)
provides an information service and a limited legal service to immigrants.

###  Migrant Rights Centre Ireland

The [ Migrant Rights Centre Ireland (MRCI) ](https://www.mrci.ie/) is a
national organisation providing support to migrant workers and their families.
The MRCI's drop-in centre provides information, advice and assistance.

###  Crosscare Migrant Project

Crosscare Migrant Project provides immigration information, support and
advocacy to migrants in Ireland. Visit [ migrantproject.ie
](http://www.migrantproject.ie/) .

###  Nasc

[ Nasc’s ](https://nascireland.org/) advocacy service provides immigration
information and advice.

###  Doras

[ Doras ](https://doras.org/) gives information and advice on immigration
through its advice and information centre.

###  Irish Refugee Council

The [ Irish Refugee Council ](https://www.irishrefugeecouncil.ie/) has a drop
in centre that can give you advice about the asylum process, direct provision
and family reunification.

##  Other organisations that can help

###  International Protection Accommodation Service (IPAS)

[ IPAS ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/d9f43-international-protection-
accommodation-services-ipas/) provides accommodation to people who have
applied for international protection. It arranges accommodation and co-
ordinates other services (including health, social services, welfare and
education) for asylum seekers and people who have international protection.

###  Scheme of voluntary assisted return

If you wish to return voluntarily to your country of origin, the International
Organisation for Migration (IOM) may be able to assist you to return home. The
IOM runs a [ Voluntary Assisted Return and Reintegration Scheme
](https://eea.iom.int/ireland) , which can help you with travel documentation
and arrange for transit and arrival assistance if needed.  

##  Contacts

For further information on supports for foreign nationals in Ireland, you can
contact your local [ Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) or the [ Citizens Information Phone
Service.
](http://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/services/citizens/citizens_callcentres.html)

###  Immigrant Council of Ireland

2 St Andrew Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Information and Referral Service: Mon, Tues, Thurs, Fri
10am - 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 674 0200

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 645 8059

**Homepage:** [ https://www.immigrantcouncil.ie/
](https://www.immigrantcouncil.ie/)

###  Migrant Rights Centre Ireland

13 Lower Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland  
D01 Y893

**Tel:** (01) 889 7570

**Homepage:** [ https://www.mrci.ie/ ](https://www.mrci.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@mrci.ie ](mailto:info@mrci.ie)

###  Crosscare Migrant Project

1a Cathedral Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 873 2844

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 873 7003

**Homepage:** [ http://www.migrantproject.ie/ ](http://www.migrantproject.ie/)

**Email:** [ migrantproject@crosscare.ie ](mailto:migrantproject@crosscare.ie)

###  International Organization for Migration

116 Lower Baggot Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 676 0655

**Locall:** Freephone: 1800 406 406

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 676 0656

**Homepage:** [ https://ireland.iom.int/ ](https://ireland.iom.int/)

**Email:** [ iomdublin@iom.int ](mailto:iomdublin@iom.int)

###  Doras

Central Buildings  
51A O'Connell Street  
Limerick  
V94 W275

**Tel:** 061 310 328 and 083 080 2378

**Homepage:** [ https://doras.org/ ](https://doras.org/)

**Email:** [ info@doras.org ](mailto:info@doras.org)

###  Nasc Migrant and Refugee Rights

34 Paul Street  
Cork  
T12 W14H

**Tel:** 021 427 3594

**Homepage:** [ https://nascireland.org/ ](https://nascireland.org/)

**Email:** [ reception@nascireland.org ](mailto:reception@nascireland.org)

###  International Protection Accommodation Service

Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth  
Miesian Plaza  
Lower Baggot Street  
Dublin 2

**Tel:** +353 1 418 3200

**Fax:** +353 1 418 3271

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/d9f43-international-
protection-accommodation-services-ipas/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/d9f43-international-protection-
accommodation-services-ipas/)

**Email:** [ ipasinbox@equality.gov.ie ](mailto:ipasinbox@equality.gov.ie)

###  Irish Refugee Council

37 Killarney Street  
Mountjoy  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 764 5854

**Fax:** (01) 672 5927

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irishrefugeecouncil.ie
](http://www.irishrefugeecouncil.ie)

**Email:** [ info@irishrefugeecouncil.ie ](mailto:info@irishrefugeecouncil.ie)

###  Tourist SOS

O’Connell Street  
Dublin  
D01 EF98  
Ireland  
  
and  
  
1-6 Pearse Street  
Dublin  
D02 W289  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 661 0562 and +353 (0) 87 47 69402

**Homepage:** [ https://www.touristsos.ie ](https://www.touristsos.ie)

**Email:** [ info@touristsos.ie ](mailto:info@touristsos.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/support-services-for-
foreign-nationals/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Support%20services%20for%20foreign%20nationals%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/support-services-for-
foreign-nationals/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/support-services-for-
foreign-nationals/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Support%20services%20for%20foreign%20nationals%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/support-services-for-
foreign-nationals/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Foreign driving licences in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-permit/)

How to exchange a driving licence issued in another country for an Irish
driving licence, including information on the fees and a list of recognised
exchange countries.

1485.5585

  * [ _How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-in-ireland/)

Outlines the services and online tools available to get recognition for your
foreign qualification in Ireland. Also explains how the National Framework of
Qualifications can help you compare and contrast different qualifications.

1477.1829

  * [ _Long-Stay Contributions for Residential Support Services_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/long-stay-contributions/)

If your accommodation or your daily living costs are provided by the Health
Service Executive (HSE), or on behalf of the HSE, you may have to pay a Long-
Stay Contribution towards these maintenance and accommodation costs.

1329.8275

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

