**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Coming to work in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/) > [
Finding work or starting a business ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/) > Coming to set up a business or invest in Ireland

#  Coming to set up a business or invest in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Schemes for self-employed non-EEAnationals 
  * Information and supports 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you are an [ EEA or Swiss national ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/) you are
entitled to come and work in Ireland either as an employed or a self-employed
person. EEA and Swiss nationals do not need permission to establish a business
in Ireland and they do not require a visa to visit, travel to, live or work in
Ireland.

UK citizens have the right to work within Ireland, including on a self-
employed basis. Find out more in our document on the [ Common Travel Area
between Ireland and the United Kingdom ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-
and-the-uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/) . You can read more
about ‘ [ Residence rights of UK citizens ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-
and-the-uk/residence-rules-UK-citizens/) ’.

If you are coming from outside Ireland to set up a business you will need
information on a number of topics such as tax and legal requirements – see
‘Information and supports’ below.

##  Schemes for self-employed non-EEAnationals

###  Immigrant Investor Programme

**The Immigrant Investor Programme (IIP) closed to new applicants at the end
of 15 February 2023.** You can read [ 'frequently asked questions'
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/FAQs-closure-of-
IIP-Feb-2023-1.pdf) on the closure of the scheme and [ what the winding down
of the IIP means for existing projects and investors
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/processing-of-iip-applications-on-hand-
following-the-closure-of-the-programme/) .

The Programme provided a range of investment options which allowed approved
non-EEA investors and their immediate family enter Ireland on multi-entry
visas and remain here for up to 5 years with the possibility of ongoing
renewal.

###  Start-up Entrepreneur Programme

The Start-up Entrepreneur Programme (STEP) allows a non-EEA national with an
innovative business idea and minimum funding of €50,000 to come and set up a
business in Ireland. The aim of the Programme is to support [ High Potential
Start-Ups ](https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/Start-a-Business-in-
Ireland/Do-I-qualify-as-a-HPSU-/) which are defined as start-up ventures that
are:

  * Introducing a new or innovative product or service to international markets 
  * Involved in manufacturing or internationally traded services 
  * Capable of creating 10 jobs in Ireland and realising €1 million in sales within three to four years of starting up 
  * Led by an experienced management team 
  * Headquartered and controlled in Ireland 
  * Less than 5 years old 

The STEP scheme does not apply to retail, catering, personal services or
similar businesses. No initial job creation targets will be set as it is
recognised that such businesses can take some time to get off the ground.
There is detailed information in the [ Start-up Entrepreneur Programme
Guidelines. ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/start-up-entrepreneur-programme-
step/)

###  Residency

Successful applicants for the **Start-up Entrepreneur Programme** and their
immediate families will be granted residence permission for 2 years initially.
Their immediate family means their spouse, civil partner or partner and
dependent children aged under 18. In certain cases, children between the ages
of 18 and 24 will be considered for residence under the programme. This
permission can be renewed for a further 3 years. After these first 5 years,
the investor or entrepreneur can apply for long-term residence. If required
they will be granted multiple entry visas for the same duration.

##  Information and supports

If you are coming from outside Ireland to set up a business you will need
information on a number of topics such as tax and legal requirements. You can
find information about [ starting a business ](/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/) and  being self-employed  on
this website, including details of legal structures and potential liabilities.
You can read about the organisations, websites and publications that can help
you in our document, [ Sources of information on starting a business
](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/finding-information-on-
starting-business/) .

[ Businessregulation.ie ](http://www.businessregulation.ie/) is a portal to
help you identify the main regulations which affect your business. If you are
self-employed and your income is reduced you can find out more in our document
on [ self employment and unemployment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/self-employed-and-unemployment/) .

[ IDA (Irish Development Authority) Ireland ](http://www.idaireland.com/) is
an Irish government agency with responsibility for securing new investment
from overseas in manufacturing and internationally traded services sectors. It
can provide information about setting up a business in Ireland and may provide
grants to companies wishing to locate in Ireland or expand their existing
operations in Ireland.

[ Enterprise Ireland ](http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/) is an Irish
government agency which is responsible for the development of Irish industry.
It provides advice and financial support to [ High Potential Start-Up (HPSU)
businesses ](http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/Start-a-Business-in-
Ireland/) . You can find information about [ starting a business in Ireland
](http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/Start-a-Business-in-Ireland/Startups-
from-Outside-Ireland/) on its website.

[ Local Enterprise Offices ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/News-and-
Events/Local-Enterprise-Offices-Open-for-Business.html) provide supports such
as advice and grants to local businesses (10 or fewer employees) that are
starting up or in development. You can find information about their [ training
programmes ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-
Supports/Training-Programmes/) and [ start your own business courses
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-Supports/Training-
Programmes/Start-Your-Own-Business-Programme/) as well as [ mentoring
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-Supports/Mentoring/) and [
financial supports ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Discover-Business-
Supports/Financial-Supports/) on [ localenterprise.ie.
](https://www.localenterprise.ie/)

##  How to apply

To apply for the **Start-up Entrepreneur Programme** you complete the [ start
-up entrepreneur application form (pdf) ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/STEP-Application-Form.pdf) and pay a non-refundable
application fee of €350. You can get full details on the STEP from [ ISD
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/start-up-entrepreneur-programme-step/) .

The application forms and guidelines as well as a [ sample business plan
template ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/business-plan-template.docx) are available on the ISD
website. You will need the following documentation to complete the
application:

  * Your passport and those of your spouse/partner and dependants (if applicable) 
  * Evidence of family relationships (if applicable) 
  * Evidence of funds 
  * Evidence of investment or details of start-up 
  * Police report or character report from risk management consultancy for yourself and for your spouse or partner (if applicable) 

More [ information about the investor and entrepreneur programmes
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-live-in-ireland/i-want-to-invest-
in-ireland/) is available on irishimmigration.ie.

Contact the Companies Registration Office to [ register your business
](https://www.cro.ie/Registration/Overview) \- see 'Where to apply' below. You
can register and file your documents such as your annual returns [ online with
CRO using CORE (Companies Online Registration Environment).
](https://core.cro.ie/)

You can contact your Local Enterprise Office to find out the supports
available for setting up a business in Ireland - see 'Where to apply' below.

You can find out about [ registering for tax
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/business/running/registering-tax.html) from your
tax office – see ‘Where to apply’ below.

##  Where to apply

Contact [ your tax office ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact/index.html)

Contact your [ Local Enterprise Office ](https://www.localenterprise.ie/Find-
Your-Local-Enterprise-Office/)

Contact your [ local development company (pdf)
](https://www.pobal.ie/Beneficiaries/SICAP/Documents/SICAP%20PIs%20for%20Web%201.pdf)

###  Investment and Entrepreneur Unit

Department of Justice

Immigration Service Delivery  
13-14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
D02 XK70  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-live-in-
ireland/i-want-to-invest-in-ireland/ ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-
to-live-in-ireland/i-want-to-invest-in-ireland/)

**Email:** [ investmentandstartup@justice.ie
](mailto:investmentandstartup@justice.ie)

###  Companies Registration Office

Bloom House,  
Gloucester Place Lower,  
Dublin 1,  
D01 C8P4

**Opening Hours:** 10am to 12:30pm and 2:30pm to 4pm, Monday-Friday

**Tel:** (01) 804 5200

**Locall:** 0818 452 000

**Fax:** (01) 804 5222

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cro.ie ](http://www.cro.ie)

**Email:** [ cro.info@enterprise.gov.ie ](mailto:cro.info@enterprise.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 23 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Coming%20to%20set%20up%20a%20business%20or%20invest%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Coming%20to%20set%20up%20a%20business%20or%20invest%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Step-by-step guide to setting up a business in Ireland_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/step-by-step-guide-to-setting-up-a-business-in-ireland/)

Find out how to set up a business in Ireland, from writing a business plan to
hiring employees.

2254.795

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

1334.378

  * [ _How to set up a new club_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/setting-up-a-new-club/)

This page outlines what is involved in setting up a new club and where you can
go to get more information.

1235.9916

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

