**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Housing taxes and reliefs ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/) > Deferring payment of the Local Property
Tax

#  Deferring payment of the Local Property Tax

  * Introduction 
  * Deferral of LPT based on income 
  * Deferral following a death 
  * Deferral based on personal insolvency 
  * Deferral based on hardship 
  * Interest charged 
  * How to apply 
  * More information 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

In certain circumstances, you can delay paying some or all of your Local
Property Tax (LPT) until a later date. This is known as a deferral.

You may qualify for a deferral if:

  * Your income is below a certain amount 
  * You are the personal representative of a deceased person who was liable for LPT 
  * You have a [ Debt Settlement Arrangement or Personal Insolvency Arrangement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/)
  * Paying would cause you too much financial hardship 

If you meet the deferral requirements, you can choose to defer the LPT until
your financial circumstances improve or the property is sold. However, this
does not mean that you are [ exempt from the LPT ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax-exemptions/) . Interest
is charged on the deferred amount and the deferred amount remains a charge on
the property.

If you qualify for partial deferral, you can defer 50% of your LPT and pay the
other 50%.

##  Deferral of LPT based on income

You may qualify for full or partial deferral of LPT for a property you own and
live in if your income is below a certain amount.

You qualify for deferral each year based on your estimated gross income for
the previous year. So, for example, if you were liable for LPT on 1 November
2023 (the liability date) you would [ estimate your gross income
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/local-property-tax/deferral-of-
payment/income-thresholds.aspx) for 2023 to see whether you qualify for
deferral or partial deferral of the payment in 2024.

If you have an outstanding mortgage, the income threshold is increased by 80%
of your gross mortgage interest payments. The mortgage must have been taken
out before 1 November 2020. You cannot avail of this deferral if you have
taken out your mortgage since 1 November 2020.

**Income thresholds for full and partial (50%) deferral of LPT liability** **Liable person (owner-occupiers only)** |  **To qualify for a full deferral your gross income must not exceed** |  **To qualify for a partial (50%) deferral your gross income must not exceed**  
---|---|---  
Single, no mortgage  |  €18,000  |  €30,000   
Couple, no mortgage  |  €30,000  |  €42,000   
Single, with mortgage  |  €18,000 + 80% of gross mortgage interest  |  €30,000 + 80% of gross mortgage interest   
Couple, with mortgage  |  €30,000 + 80% of gross mortgage interest  |  €42,000 + 80% of gross mortgage interest   
  
_Gross income_ is your income before any deductions, allowances or reliefs. It
includes income that is exempt from income tax and income from Department of
Social Protection (DSP) payments, but it does not include Child Benefit.

_Couples_ include married people, people in a civil partnership and certain
cohabitants. For LPT deferral purposes, cohabitants must have lived together
for at least 2 years if you have children and 5 years if you do not have
children.

If you claimed a deferral for a year and your circumstances change you must
inform Revenue.

##  Deferral following a death

If one member of a couple who qualified for a deferral dies, the deferral will
remain in place until the next valuation date (currently 1 November 2025) and
the income of the surviving person is not taken into account until then.

On 1 November 2025, the surviving person may make a claim for deferral of the
tax. If you satisfy the conditions, you will qualify for deferral. If you do
not qualify for deferral after 2025, the amount that was deferred up to the
end of 2025 may continue to be deferred. Interest will continue to be charged
on the deferred amount in the usual way.

If you inherit a property from someone who is not your spouse, civil partner
or cohabitant, Revenue may allow the deferral to continue if you apply for a
deferral and qualify. The transfer of the property to you means that the tax
deferred (plus interest) becomes payable at that point if you do not meet the
conditions for a deferral in your own right.

###  Deferral for personal representatives of a deceased liable person

[ When a person dies, their property passes to their personal representative.
](/en/death/the-deceaseds-estate/what-happens-the-deceaseds-estate/) The
personal representative then has the duty to distribute the deceased person's
money and property in accordance with the will or with the laws of intestacy
if there is no will.

The personal representatives of a deceased person may apply for a deferral of
LPT until the earlier of either:

  * The date on which the property is transferred or sold 
  * 3 years after the date of death 

To qualify for deferral, the deceased person must have been the sole owner of
the property but it does not need to have been their main residence.

You can claim a deferral for any LPT outstanding at the date of death, any LPT
already deferred by the deceased person and LPT that became payable following
the death.

##  Deferral based on personal insolvency

If you have entered into a [ Debt Settlement Arrangement or a Personal
Insolvency Arrangement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/) , you can apply for a deferral of LPT
while the insolvency arrangement is in place. You must have formally agreed
your insolvency arrangement with the Insolvency Service of Ireland and your
Insolvency Case Number must be included with your application.

You will have to pay the deferred LPT, including accrued interest, when the
insolvency arrangement ends.

##  Deferral based on hardship

You can claim a deferral if:

  * You have had an unexpected and unavoidable significant loss or expense and 
  * As a result, you are unable to pay LPT without too much financial hardship 

You must disclose your financial circumstances and any other information
required by Revenue.

Examples of the type of losses or expenses that may be considered include:

  * Emergency medical expenses 
  * Major repairs that are unexpectedly needed to keep your house habitable 
  * Expenses due to a serious accident or the death of a family member 
  * The loss of your job 
  * A bad debt you incur if you are self-employed 

##  Interest charged

Any deferred amounts have interest charged on them at a rate of 4% a year. The
previous deferral interest rate of 4% applied up to 31 December 2021. The rate
of interest charged on all deferred amounts from 1 January 2022 is 3% per
year.

##  How to apply

You can apply for a deferral or partial deferral **on the basis of your**
**income** when you [ make your LPT return
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/local-property-tax/submitting-your-local-
property-tax-return/index.aspx) .

If you have already submitted an LPT return, you can apply to Revenue in
writing by post or through [ myEnquiries ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-
web/sign_in.html) .

If you are applying for a deferral **under any of the other categories** , you
must submit the [ LPT2 form (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/documents/lpt/form-lpt2.pdf) .

If you have been allowed a deferral, at any time you can make a payment of
all, or some, of the deferred amount. Revenue will credit a partial payment to
the oldest period of deferred LPT first.

##  More information

Revenue has published [ Guidelines for Deferral or Part Deferral of Payment of
LPT (pdf) ](https://revenue.ie/en/property/documents/lpt/guidelines-for-
deferral-of-lpt.pdf) .

##  Where to apply

###  The Revenue Commissioners

Local Property Tax (LPT) Branch

P.O. Box 1  
Limerick  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0) 1 738 3626

**Homepage:** [ https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-service-
contact/lpt-vht.aspx ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-service-
contact/lpt-vht.aspx)

_**Page edited:** 6 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Deferring%20payment%20of%20the%20Local%20Property%20Tax&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Deferring%20payment%20of%20the%20Local%20Property%20Tax&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/deferring-local-property-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to value your property for Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/valuing-property-for-lpt/)

Local Property Tax is a self-assessment tax. There are tools and information
sources that you can use to help you assess the value of your residential
property.

2982.2783

  * [ _How to pay your Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/paying-local-property-tax/)

You can pay your Local Property Tax (LPT) in a variety of ways. This page
explains your options.

2731.0515

  * [ _Exemptions from Local Property Tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax-exemptions/)

The Local Property Tax is a tax payable on residential property. This document
gives information about properties that are exempt from the tax.

2643.9355

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

