**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Tax credits and reliefs for people with
disabilities ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-
disabilities/) > VAT refunds on aids and appliances used by people with
disabilities

#  VAT refunds on aids and appliances used by people with disabilities

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * How to apply 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you live in Ireland and you have a physical or mental disability, you may
get a refund of [ Value-Added Tax (VAT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/duties-and-
vat/value-added-tax/) on certain aids and appliances that you need.

A refund may also be available to someone who pays for aids and appliances
that are for the exclusive use of someone else who has a disability.

This scheme of VAT refunds on aids and appliances can apply to adaptation and
installation work being carried out to make a home more suitable for an older
person or for a person with a disability – see ‘Housing adaptations’ below.

The scheme does not apply if you have not been charged VAT on your purchase.
For example, wheelchairs are zero-rated for VAT.

##  Rules

Under the [ Value-Added Tax (Refund of Tax) (No. 15) Order 1981
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1981/si/428/made/en/print) , you can
claim a VAT refund on aids and appliances that help you carry out daily
activities at home or at work. Revenue may ask for medical evidence of your
disability.

VAT refunds are **not** allowed on services or on the rental of aids and
appliances.

To claim a VAT refund you must:

  * Live in Ireland 
  * Have a disability 
  * Need the aid or appliance to help with daily activities 

The aid or appliance must be owned by the person with the disability and be
for their exclusive use. If the VAT refund is being sought by someone other
than the user of the aid or appliance, [ Revenue ](http://www.revenue.ie) may
ask for evidence that the aid is solely owned by the person with the
disability and is for their sole use. In this case, the purchaser must not get
the goods from their own business.

Examples of eligible aids and appliances include:

  * Domestic aids, for example, eating and drinking aids 
  * Walk-in baths 
  * Commode chairs 
  * Lifting seats and specified chairs 
  * Braille books 
  * Hoists and lifts, including stair lifts 
  * Communication aids 

Revenue has more information on [ how to reclaim VAT on aids and appliances
for people with disabilities ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/repayments-to-
unregistered-persons/disabled-persons/reclaim-vat-aids-appliances.aspx) .

###  Housing adaptations

If you are having your home improved or adapted to make it more accessible,
you may be able to claim a refund of VAT paid on the cost of installation and
adaptation work. You may also qualify for a grant, such as the [ Housing
Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability ](/en/housing/housing-grants-
and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-disability/) , the [
Mobility Aids Grant Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-
supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/mobility-aids-grant-
scheme/) or the [ Housing Aid for Older People Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-
grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/) . Read more about [ housing
grants and schemes ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/) .

###  Buying and adapting a vehicle

You can claim remission or repayment of vehicle registration tax (VRT),
repayment of VAT on the purchase of a vehicle and repayment of VAT on the cost
of adapting a vehicle, up to a maximum amount. You can find out more in our
document on [ Tax relief for disabled drivers and passengers ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-
disabled-passengers/) .

##  How to apply

You can [ apply online using eRepayments ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-
services/services/claims-and-refunds/apply-for-refund-of-vat-on-aids-and-
appliances-for-persons-with-disabilities.aspx) in Revenue's [ myAccount
](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) service or [ ROS
](https://www.ros.ie/ros-registration-web/ros-registration) .

You can also apply by completing [ form VAT61a (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/documents/form-vat61a.pdf) and returning it to
Revenue's Central Repayments Office (see 'Further information' below).

You must attach supporting documentation with your claim - for example,
original invoices for all the goods in the claim or, in the case of imported
goods, receipts for VAT paid at importation. In the case of a [ hire purchase
agreement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/hire-
purchase/) , you will need to supply a copy of the agreement and the invoice.

You must make your claim within 4 years from the end of the taxable period in
which you bought the aid or appliance. Taxable periods within each year are:

  * January/February 
  * March/April 
  * May/June 
  * July/August 
  * September/October 
  * November/December 

##  Further information

For more information or to claim a refund on an aid or appliance contact:

###  Central Repayments Office

Office of the Revenue Commissioners  
M: TEK II Building  
Armagh Road  
Monaghan  
H18 YH59  
Ireland

**Tel:** 047 62 100

**Homepage:** [ http://www.revenue.ie ](http://www.revenue.ie)

_**Page edited:** 29 March 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-
on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=VAT%20refunds%20on%20aids%20and%20appliances%20used%20by%20people%20with%20%20disabilities&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-
on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-on-
aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=VAT%20refunds%20on%20aids%20and%20appliances%20used%20by%20people%20with%20%20disabilities&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-
on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-
disabilities/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Assessment of need for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/assessment-of-need-for-people-with-disabilites/)

The Disability Act 2005 provides for the Assessment of Need for people with
disabilities. Find out how the assessment is carried out.

2089.318

  * [ _Regulation of residential services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-care-people-with-disabilities/)

Residential services for people with disabilities must meet certain standards.
The Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) registers and inspects
these services.

2055.464

  * [ _Checklist for people with disabilities and long-term illness_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/checklist-disability/)

Quick reference guide to services and entitlements for people with
disabilities or long-term illnesses and their families and carers

1984.5005

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

