**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Debt ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/) > Court proceedings for recovering debts

#  Court proceedings for recovering debts

  * Introduction 
  * Court procedures 
  * Which court? 
  * District Court procedure 
  * Circuit Court procedure 
  * High Court procedure 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you owe money to someone, you are their debtor. The person (or group of
people or company) you owe money to is your creditor. They are entitled to ask
you to pay your debts but they are not entitled to harass or intimidate you to
pay.

If you fail to pay a debt, your creditor is likely to go to court to get a
judgment that you owe the debt.

If the creditor gets a judgment against you, they can use different ways to
get the money from you. This is called [ enforcing a judgment ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) .

If a judgment order is made against you, you usually have to pay your
creditor’s costs in taking the case. These costs are added to the amount of
the judgment and can be enforced against you as part of the enforcement of the
judgment.

###  Legal aid

Most court proceedings about debt are under [ civil law
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil_law/) , rather than
criminal law. You may be eligible for [ civil legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-
aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/) if you pass the means test
and if your case is likely to succeed. If you accept that you owe the debt and
that you have no defence to the claim, then your case is unlikely to succeed
and you would not get civil legal aid.

If you do not pay an [ instalment order
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/#a46728) , you may have to go to
court for committal proceedings to decide if you should be sent to prison. You
can apply for [ criminal legal aid ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-
advice/criminal-legal-aid/) and the judge will decide whether you get it.

##  Court procedures

The proceedings are started by the person to whom you owe money. That person
(or group of people or company) is the creditor and the _claimant_ or
_plaintiff_ in the case. You are the debtor and the _respondent_ or
_defendant_ in the case.

The procedures and the documents which are used are different depending on
which court is involved and sometimes depending on which kind of debt is
involved.

In general, you are given documents that set out the details of what you owe.
You can choose to defend the action. This means that you must provide a
document in reply. This can argue that you do not owe the money, or that the
contract is not valid, or some other legal defence. If you do not do anything,
then the judgment will probably be awarded against you.

In general, if you are served with a document starting legal proceedings, you
have 3 options:

  * You usually have a number of days in which to pay the debt, in which case the proceedings do not start. In legal language, _the proceedings are stayed_ . 
  * If you cannot pay what is owed and you have no defence, you can agree to an order being made. 
  * If you intend to defend the action, you must serve the necessary replying documents. Then a date is usually set for a court hearing to decide what happens. 

###  Initial notice

If the matter at issue is covered by [ consumer credit legislation
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/borrowing-money-in-
ireland/) , then the person you owe the money to (the creditor) must issue a
notice to you at least 10 days before they take legal action. This notice must
include:

  * Details of the agreement 
  * The name and address of the creditor or owner 
  * Your name and address 
  * The term of the agreement to be enforced and 
  * A statement of the action the creditor intends to take to enforce the agreement, including how and when they intend to take this action 

If the consumer credit legislation does not apply, then it is the usual
practice for creditors to send a 7-day demand letter to you before starting
legal proceedings. This, however, is not always a legal requirement.

##  Which court?

Which court deals with the case depends on how much you owe. If you owe:

  * Less than €15,000, the court proceedings should be brought in the District Court 
  * Between €15,000 and €75,000, the court proceedings should be brought in the Circuit Court 
  * If you owe more than €75,000, the court proceedings should be brought in the High Court 

##  District Court procedure

In general, the legal proceedings must be started in the [ District Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/) area where you live or where the
contract was made.

District Court proceedings are started when the creditor issues a claim notice
to you. This notice states the creditor’s claim – for example, that you owe
them €5,000 for goods bought on a specific date. [ Read more about the process
of issuing a claim notice ](/en/justice/civil-law/civil-summons-in-
ireland#l62caf) .

The notice gives you 2 options. You can:

  * Pay the amount claimed within 10 days and avoid a court appearance or 
  * Dispute the claim by providing the claimant with a completed [ appearance and defence form ](https://www.courts.ie/acc/alfresco/28a0f379-5c16-47f4-a8d7-7b89ddfb16e0/Appearance and defence - general No. 42.01.docx/file) within 28 days 
  * The [ claim notice must be served ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-law/district-court-procedures/#068405) on you. The creditor must provide proof that the notice of claim form was served within the legal time limit. This can be done either by: 
  * Oral evidence to the court or 
  * A [ statutory declaration of service ](https://www.courts.ie/content/endorsement-service-registered-post) , which must be lodged with the District Court Clerk at least 4 days before the court hearing. 

If you do not respond that you intend to defend the proceedings, there is no
hearing and the creditor gets a judgment that you owe the money. In this case,
the creditor files the following documents with the District Court Clerk:

  * An affidavit or statutory declaration of service of the claim notice. An _affidavit_ is a written statement that is sworn to be true by the person signing it. 
  * A certificate of no appearance or defence. 
  * An affidavit of debt verifying the creditor’s claim. 
  * A District Court decree. 

These are then checked and, if all documents are in order, the judge of the
District Court issues the judgment. The judgment is for the amount owed plus
the costs involved in the proceedings.

Having got the judgment, the creditor is then entitled to [ enforce the
judgment ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-
judgments/) . Interest on the amount of the judgment (but not the costs) is
charged from the day the judgment is given.

###  If you defend the proceedings

If you have sent your appearance and defence form, the creditor must serve a
notice of trial on you at least 10 days before the court hearing.

At the hearing, the judge hears the arguments from the creditor and from you
and makes a decision. It could be a judgment in favour of the creditor or to
dismiss the action.

If the judge considers that you cannot pay the amount through no fault of
yours, the judge may elect to pause the enforcement of the court order for a
period of time – this is known as [ a stay of execution ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-of-judgments#lff299) . Alternatively,
the judge may make an order for payment by instalments.

If you do not defend the proceedings, there is no hearing so it is highly
unlikely that a stay of execution or order of payment by instalments will be
granted.

##  Circuit Court procedure

The procedure in [ the Circuit Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-
court/) is similar to that in the District Court but there are some
differences in the documents used.

The proceedings start with the creditor serving an [ ordinary civil bill
](https://www.courts.ie/content/ordinary-civil-bill) on you. This is similar
to the claim notice used in the District Court. The claim being made by the
creditor is set out in the indorsement of claim. This must set out the details
such as the date and the content of the contract.

The [ civil bill ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-
law/circuit-court-procedures/#7c1cbe) states that, if you want to defend the
case, you must enter an appearance within 10 days. This period can be extended
by agreement or by direction of the court. Entering an appearance means that
you must lodge a specified form with the County Registrar and give a copy to
the creditor or his solicitor. The County Registrar organises the business of
the Circuit Court and has a similar role to that of the Clerk of the District
Court.

If you do not want to defend the action, you may consent to the claim.

If you do not [ enter an appearance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-law/circuit-court-
procedures/#deb4bb) or if you enter an appearance and then do not deliver a
defence, the creditor may [ apply to the court for a _judgment in default of
appearance_ ](https://www.courts.ie/content/notice-motion-judgment-default-
appearance) to get a judgment.

Once the judgment has been granted, the creditor may then apply for an
_execution order_ to [ enforce the judgment ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) .

##  High Court procedure

Proceedings in the High Court are generally started by means of a [ summary
summons ](https://www.courts.ie/content/originating-summons-appearance#_mon4)
. Summons are often served in person. However, there are [ other ways a
summons can be served ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/service-summons) .

The summary summons must include an indorsement of claim. This sets out the
amount which the creditor claims is owed plus costs. It also states that, if
you pay within 6 days, the proceedings will not go ahead (the proceedings are
stayed). If the creditor is a licensed moneylender, this must be stated in the
indorsement of claim. Other details about the loan agreement must also be
stated, such as the rate of interest.

When you get a summary summons, you have 3 options:

  1. Pay the amount owed plus costs within 6 days and the proceedings will not go ahead 
  2. Consent to judgment and ask for further time for payment 
  3. Indicate an intention to defend the proceedings by [ entering an appearance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/civil-law/circuit-court-procedures/#deb4bb) . You do this by delivering a memorandum in writing to the [ Central Office of the High Court ](https://courts.ie/content/central-office-high-court) within 8 days of the service of the summons. 

If you do not enter an appearance, the creditor may get judgment in default of
appearance from the Central Office of the High Court. In some cases, the
permission of the Master of the High Court is required before such a judgment
can be granted.

If you do enter an appearance and defend the proceedings, then the case is
heard by a High Court judge and judgment against you may be given.

Sometimes, the creditor looks for [ an order of _fieri facias_
](https://www.courts.ie/content/execution#_FP101) at the same time. This is a
court order instructing a sheriff to obtain the amount owed by possessing and
selling the property of a judgment debtor.

##  Further information

The [ website of the Courts Service ](https://www.courts.ie/) has detailed
information on [ the court rules ](https://www.courts.ie/content/court-rules)
for proceedings in the District Court, the Circuit Court and the Superior
Courts (that is the High Court and Supreme Court).

###  Courts Service

15-24 Phoenix Street North  
Smithfield  
Dublin 7  
D07 F95Y  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 888 6000

**Homepage:** [ https://courts.ie/ ](https://courts.ie/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us
](https://www.courts.ie/content/find-us)

_**Page edited:** 8 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/court-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Court%20proceedings%20for%20recovering%20debts&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/court-
procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Court%20proceedings%20for%20recovering%20debts&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/court-procedures/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Courts_ ](/en/justice/courts-system/courts/)

An outline of the courts and the offices that support them.

824.2263

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

783.60895

  * [ _Circuit Court procedures_ ](/en/justice/civil-law/circuit-court-procedures/)

A Civil Bill is a document that you must serve on the defendant in order to
commence proceedings in the Circuit Court. Find out more

780.2634

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

