**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Housing tax credits and reliefs

#  Housing tax credits and reliefs

  * Introduction 
  * Rent Tax Credit 
  * Mortgage interest tax credit 
  * Rent-a-room relief 
  * Tax when providing short-term guest accommodation 
  * Tax relief for landlords 
  * Tax when transferring ownership 

##  Introduction

You can claim tax relief on some housing incomes and expenses and these are
outlined below.

There is also a tax refund scheme, which is designed to help first-time buyers
of newly built homes to get the required deposit. For more information, see
the [ Help to Buy (HTB) incentive ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/help-to-buy-scheme/) .

For information about Local Property Tax, see [ Exemptions from Local Property
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/local-property-tax-
exemptions/) .

##  Rent Tax Credit

You can claim an income tax credit for rent you have paid.

For 2024, the amount of the credit is 20% of your rent payments in the year,
up to a maximum of:

  * €750 for an individual 
  * €1,500 for a couple who are [ jointly assessed for tax ](../income_tax/taxation_of_married_people.en.html#l83f01)

[ Read more about the Rent Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-
and-reliefs/rent-tax-credit/) and how to claim it.

##  Mortgage interest tax credit

A new mortgage interest tax relief was announced in Budget 2024.

To qualify, you must have had an outstanding mortgage balance of between
€80,000 and €500,000 on 31 December 2022.

The tax relief is 20% of the increased interest you paid on your mortgage in
2023 when compared with the amount you paid in 2022. The relief is capped at
€1,250.

[ Read more about the mortgage interest tax credit ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/mortgage-interest-relief/) .

##  Rent-a-room relief

If you rent out a room or flat in your home, you are exempt from income tax on
the amount that your tenant pays you for rent and other services, up to
€14,000 in a tax year.

[ Rent-a-room relief ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-a-room-
in-your-home/) applies only to residential tenancies, not to short-term guest
arrangements. The relief can also apply to a self-contained unit (such as a
basement flat) if it is part of your home or is directly attached to it.

You are not eligible for Rent-a-room relief if you are renting the room to
your son or daughter.

##  Tax when providing short-term guest accommodation

If you have income from providing accommodation to occasional visitors for
short periods, for example through an online accommodation booking site, this
income is not considered to be rental income. This is because the visitors use
the accommodation as guests rather than tenants. Revenue have published [ a
guidance manual on how such income is treated for tax purposes (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-tax-capital-gains-
tax-corporation-tax/part-04/04-01-20.pdf) .

##  Tax relief for landlords

You can deduct the interest on mortgages used to purchase, improve or repair
rented residential property when working out your rental income for tax
purposes.

You must show that you have registered all tenancies in the property with the
[ Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/residential-tenancies-board/) . Interest can only be deducted during
the period in which the property is let.

The amount of interest you can deduct on these mortgages has increased in
recent years:

  * Before 2017, it was 75% of the interest 
  * In 2017, it was 80% of the interest 
  * In 2018, it was 85% of the interest 
  * From January 2019, it is 100% of the interest 

Interest is treated as accruing on a daily basis and the date the loan was
taken out is not relevant.

###  Residential Premises Rental Income Relief

A new tax relief for individual landlords of residential properties was
introduced in 2024. The Residential Premises Rental Income Relief is available
for the years 2024 to 2027.

The relief is available at 20% of rental income profit. The maximum amount of
relief each year is:

  * €600 in 2024 
  * €800 in 2025 
  * €1,000 in 2026 and 2027 

You can claim the relief in your income tax return.

Once you claim the relief, it will be taken back if you dispose of the
property within the following 4 years.

[ Read more information about the Residential Premises Rental Income Relief on
revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/land-and-property/rprir/index.aspx) .

##  Tax when transferring ownership

When ownership of a property is transferred, the financial gains are usually
liable to tax but some exemptions and reliefs apply.

For instance, when you sell a property, any profit you make over the amount
that you paid for it would usually be liable for Capital Gains Tax. There is
however an exemption if the property is the main residence where you live. [
Read more about Capital Gains Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-gains-tax/) .

If you get property as a gift or inheritance, you may have to pay Capital
Acquisitions Tax. A number of reliefs and exemptions apply including if the
transfer is between spouses or civil partners or, in certain circumstances, if
you get a house that has been your main residence. [ Read more about Capital
Acquisitions Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-
tax/) .

You may also have to pay stamp duty when ownership of a property is
transferred but there are some exemptions. [ Read more about stamp duty
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/stamp-duty/) .

_**Page edited:** 31 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Housing%20tax%20credits%20and%20reliefs&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Housing%20tax%20credits%20and%20reliefs&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Income tax credits and reliefs following a death_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/)

An explanation of the tax credits that apply when someone dies and the tax
reliefs for their spouse or civil partner.

2298.896

  * [ _Introduction to income tax credits and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/introduction-to-income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

Tax reliefs reduce the amount of tax that you have to pay. Find out about the
different types of income tax relief that apply to your circumstances.

2137.314

  * [ _Tax credits and reliefs for people over 65_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

There are some tax reliefs specifically for people aged over 65. This page
also gives an overview of other tax reliefs that may be relevant.

2041.1969

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

