**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Moving to Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/) > [ Introduction to
the Irish system ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-
irish-system/) > Moving to Ireland and your social security entitlements

#  Moving to Ireland and your social security entitlements

  * Social security in Ireland 
  * Your pension and moving to Ireland 
  * Transferring benefits between countries 
  * Further information 

##  Social security in Ireland

The social security system in Ireland may provide you with a benefit or
payment, for example, if you are sick, unemployed, have children or retire.

There can be some differences between the system in Ireland and your home
country. If you are thinking of coming to Ireland to live, work, study or
retire, it is important for you to be aware of the [ social security system in
Ireland ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
system-in-ireland/) .

##  Your pension and moving to Ireland

###  EU Regulations and Bilateral Social Security Agreements

If you have come from a country covered by EU Regulations or a Bilateral
Social Security Agreement, your pension rights from the other country are
protected when you move to Ireland.

####  Applying for a UK or EU pension

If you are living in Ireland, but you have never worked in Ireland you can
apply for your social security pension in Ireland or to the country where you
last worked and paid social insurance.

**If you are applying in Ireland** you must complete the [ application form
EUP 65 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/70677/d9a8ea0ec5da486e9fe2be9260a6c6b7.pdf) and send
it with the relevant documents such as birth and marriage certificates to the
[ State Pension Contributory Section of the Department of Social Protection
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e6f908-state-pension-contributory/#apply) .
Your application will be then sent to the International Pension Centre in the
UK or to the appropriate EU/EEA authority.

If you are coming from a country covered by EU Regulations, you should bring
form U1 with you. This form are available at the relevant social security
agency in the country you are coming from and provides details of your social
insurance record.

When you come to Ireland, you will need a [ Personal Public Service Number
(PPS number). ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) This number is a unique
personal identification number that you need to apply for State benefits and
services in Ireland. You can find out about [ claiming a Irish social welfare
payment. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/)

**If you are applying to the UK** for your UK State pension and you have not
been sent an application form, you should contact the [ International Pension
Centre ](https://www.gov.uk/international-pension-centre) .

##  Transferring benefits between countries

###  Transferring EU benefits

If you are coming to Ireland and you a getting a social security benefit from
a country covered by EU Regulations, you should check with the authority
paying the benefit if you can continue to get it when living in Ireland.

###  Transferring UK benefits

Many UK benefits, including national insurance pensions, can continue to be
paid to you by the UK Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) if you move from
the UK to Ireland. You should always ask, before you move, if you can transfer
your existing UK benefits outside the UK. Contact the [ DWP's International
Pension Centre ](https://www.gov.uk/international-pension-centre) for more
information.

##  Further information

###  Department of Social Protection

Social Welfare Services  
College Road  
Sligo F91 T384  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** This office does not offer a service to personal callers.
All queries must be made using the online enquiry form, by telephone or in
writing.

**Tel:** (071) 915 7100 or 0818 200 400

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-social-
protection/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-social-
protection/)

_**Page edited:** 23 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/moving-to-ireland-
and-your-social-security-entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Moving%20to%20Ireland%20and%20your%20social%20security%20entitlements&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/moving-to-ireland-
and-your-social-security-entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/moving-to-ireland-
and-your-social-security-entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Moving%20to%20Ireland%20and%20your%20social%20security%20entitlements&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/moving-to-ireland-
and-your-social-security-entitlements/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Leaving Ireland and your social security entitlements_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/leaving-ireland-and-your-social-security-entitlements/)

Ireland has social security arrangements with other countries. What do you
need to know about social security (PRSI) if you are leaving Ireland to live
or work abroad?

2968.4072

  * [ _Marital status and social welfare entitlements_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/married-couples/marital-status-and-social-welfare-entitlements/)

Your marital status can affect your eligibility for certain social welfare
payments. Find out more.

1631.2563

  * [ _Case study: Calculating your pension under EU social security agreements_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-1-calculating-your-pension-under-bi-lateral-social-security-agreements/)

Case study showing how to calculate your pension entitlement under EU social
security agreements

1596.5936

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

