**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Employment tax credits and
reliefs

#  Employment tax credits and reliefs

  * Introduction 
  * Employee Tax Credit 
  * Benefits from employment 
  * Working from home 
  * Expenses 
  * Pension contributions 
  * Cross-border workers 
  * Seafarer's Allowance 
  * Fisher Tax Credit 

##  Introduction

The amount of tax you pay depends on your income. You can read more about [
how your income tax is calculated ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-
tax-is-calculated/) .

Income tax reliefs reduce the amount of tax that you have to pay. Here are
some of the tax reliefs that relate to employment.

##  Employee Tax Credit

If you are in employment, tax on your income is deducted by your employer on
behalf of the Revenue Commissioners. This system of deduction is known as the
Pay As You Earn (PAYE) system. All PAYE taxpayers are entitled to a tax credit
known as the [ Employee Tax Credit ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-
credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/income-and-employment/employee-tax-
credit/index.aspx) (formerly known as the PAYE tax credit). This is worth
€1,875 in 2024 (€1,775 in 2023). If you are [ married and taxed under joint
assessment ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/) ,
then you and your spouse may both claim an Employee Tax Credit.

##  Benefits from employment

In Ireland, most benefits from employment that are provided in addition to pay
are subject to income tax. This also applies to benefits-in-kind.

Benefits-in-kind are benefits received by an employee that cannot be converted
into cash but that have a cash value. Examples include provision of a company
car, loans given at a special rate or provision of accommodation. Some
benefits-in-kind are exempt from tax or can be received tax efficiently.

[ Read more about benefits-in-kind and how they are taxed ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-benefits-from-employment/) .

##  Working from home

You may be able to claim tax relief on additional costs of working from home,
including electricity, heating and broadband.

Your employer can pay you a contribution towards these costs or you can make a
claim for tax relief during the year or after the end of the year. [ Read more
about Remote Working Relief ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/eworking-and-tax-relief/) .

The cost of items you buy, such as office equipment, is not eligible for
Remote Working Relief.

If your employer provides you with equipment for business use, it is not taxed
as a benefit-in-kind.

##  Expenses

Some work expenses can be deducted from your income before it is assessed for
tax. To qualify, the expenses must have been necessary in order to do your
work and must have been spent entirely for that purpose and no other.

A mileage allowance that you receive for the use of your car for business
purposes is not taxable if it does not exceed the [ civil service mileage
rates ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/employee-expenses/travel-
and-subsistence/civil-service-rates.aspx) .

There is no tax relief on expenses for getting to or from work.

The [ Bike to Work Scheme ](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/cycle-to-work-
scheme/) is a tax incentive scheme which aims to encourage employees to cycle
to and from work. Under the scheme employers can pay for bicycles and bicycle
equipment for their employees and the employee pays back through a salary
sacrifice arrangement of up to 12 months. The employee is not liable for tax,
PRSI or the Universal Social Charge on their repayments.

See Revenue for [ more details on expenses that can be deducted
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/it/employee-expenses.html) for tax purposes
including _flat-rate expenses_ . Flat-rate expenses are directly related to
the nature of the employment. A standard [ flat rate expenses allowance
(deduction) (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-
and-exemptions/documents/flat-rate-expenses.pdf) is set for various classes of
employee. The agreed deduction is then applied to all employees of the class
or group in question.

##  Pension contributions

If you pay into a [ pension ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/introduction-to-pensions/) , you can get [ tax relief on your
pension contributions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/tax-
relief-on-pensions/) .

##  Cross-border workers

If you are [ resident ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-
residence-and-domicile-in-ireland/) in Ireland and commute daily or weekly to
your place of work in another country where you pay tax, then you may qualify
for Trans-border Workers Relief. This reduces your tax in Ireland to take
account of the tax that you have paid abroad. It does this by reducing the tax
you pay in Ireland on your total income so that it is in proportion to the
amount of income from Irish sources.

For example, take the case where your total income was €50,000, of which
€5,000 was earned in Ireland and the remainder (€45,000) was earned and taxed
abroad.

The proportion of your total income that is Irish income is 1/10 (5,000
divided by 50,000).

Your Irish income tax liability is calculated as usual on the full amount of
your income, €50,000.

But under Trans-border Workers Relief, this amount of tax is then divided by
ten to give the tax that you have to pay in Ireland.

There are certain conditions on the duration and place of employment. [ More
information on Trans-border Workers Relief is available (pdf)
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-tax-capital-gains-tax-
corporation-tax/part-34/34-00-06.pdf) .

##  Seafarer's Allowance

If you are employed on board a ship and spend at least 161 days in a calendar
year at sea travelling to or from foreign ports, then you may qualify for
Seafarer's Allowance. The allowance is €6,350 and it is an allowance available
at your highest rate of tax.

[ Read information on the Seafarer’s Allowance on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/income-and-employment/seafarers-allowance-fisher-tax-
credit/seafarers-allowance.aspx) .

##  Fisher Tax Credit

If you have fished on a registered fishing vessel for at least 80 days in a
tax year you can claim an income tax credit of €1,270 per annum.

It is not available to fish farmers. If you claim this credit you cannot also
avail of the Seafarer's Allowance in the same tax year.

[ Read more about the Fisher Tax Credit on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/income-and-employment/seafarers-allowance-fisher-tax-credit/fisher-
tax-credit.aspx)

_**Page edited:** 3 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/employment-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employment%20tax%20credits%20and%20reliefs&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/employment-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/employment-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employment%20tax%20credits%20and%20reliefs&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/employment-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Housing tax credits and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

You can claim tax relief on some housing expenses and income. Find out more.

2512.3113

  * [ _Income tax credits and reliefs following a death_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs-following-a-death/)

An explanation of the tax credits that apply when someone dies and the tax
reliefs for their spouse or civil partner.

2507.924

  * [ _Introduction to income tax credits and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/introduction-to-income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

Tax reliefs reduce the amount of tax that you have to pay. Find out about the
different types of income tax relief that apply to your circumstances.

2452.7544

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

