**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Coming to work in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/) > [
Employment permits and the right to work ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/) > Working Holiday Visas in Ireland

#  Working Holiday Visas in Ireland

  * What is a working holiday visa? 
  * Requirements by country 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is a working holiday visa?

Ireland has working holiday agreements with a number of different countries.
These allow young people from certain countries to travel to Ireland for
longer than a tourist visa, and to work while you are here to support your
travel expenses.

The main purpose of your trip should be to holiday and the work or studying
should be supplemental. If you are traveling primarily to work or to study you
should look into other visas.

##  Requirements by country

The application process, requirements and permissions granted vary depending
on what country you are from. Generally, you must provide:

  * Your current passport 
  * Two recent passport photographs 
  * Proof that you have sufficient funds to sustain yourself until you can find employment and that you have either already purchased a ticket home or have the funds to do so 
  * Proof that you have private health insurance 
  * Your Curriculum Vitae (CV) 
  * Copies of educational certificates, or, if you are still a student, a letter from your college 

You must get the working holiday visa before you come to Ireland. The visa
does not guarantee that you can enter Ireland.

No matter where you are coming from you will have to register for an [ Irish
Residence Permit ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-
immigration-permission/information-on-registering/irish-residence-permit/) as
soon as possible after you arrive in Ireland if you intend to stay more than
90 days.

###  Argentina

Argentinian citizens between the ages of 18 and 35 can apply for a Working
Holiday Visa. There are 200 places available each year. If you are successful,
you may stay in Ireland for a period up to 12 months. You can leave and re-
enter Ireland during your stay and you can work, as long as it is not a
permanent job. You may also study if you wish. You can find the application
form on the [ Embassy of Ireland web page.
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/argentina/buenosaires/)

###  Australia

The Working Holiday Authorisation is open to Australian citizens between the
ages of 18 and 35. You can get a document that will let you engage in casual
or temporary work. You may not work for a single employer for more than 6
months. The Authorisation is valid for 12 months after you enter Ireland. You
can find the application form on the [ Embassy of Ireland webpage
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/australia/canberra/) . There is a processing fee
of $95 AUD.

###  Canada

Canadian citizens between the ages of 18 and 35 can apply for a Working
Holiday Authorisation. This allows you to live and work in Ireland for up to 2
years. You can apply directly to the [ Embassy
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/canada/ottawa/) or through [ SWAP Working Holidays
](https://www.swap.ca/) . There is a fee of $150 CAD.

###  Chile

There are 100 places available for Chileans between the ages of 18 and 30. If
selected you may stay in Ireland for up to one year and you may leave and
return during your stay. You may work as long as it is not a permanent job and
you may study or train. You can find the application form on the [ Embassy of
Ireland webpage ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/chile/santiago/) . There is an
application fee of 60,000 CLP.

###  Hong Kong

Applications are accepted from 1 March every year until a quota of 200 is
filled. You must be a resident of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
and have a valid HKSAR or British Nationals Overseas (BNO) passport. You must
be between the ages of 18 and 30. [ The Embassy of Ireland webpage
](https://www.dfa.ie/irish-consulate/hong-kong/our-services/visas/working-
holiday-authorisation/) has the application form and instructions. Your
documents should be submitted to the consulate by appointment. There is no
application fee at present.

###  Japan

The Working Holiday Programme is open to Japanese citizens between the ages of
18 and 25. If you have been in full time education or employment, the age
limit can be raised to 30. The Embassy of Ireland has certain periods of time
when they accept applications. These are [ listed on their website
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/japan/tokyo/) . Once the application period has
started you can download the application, gather the required documents, and
submit your application by mail to the Embassy of Ireland in Tokyo.

###  New Zealand

The Working Holiday Authorisation is open to applicants between the ages of 18
and 30. You will be issued a document that will let you engage in casual or
temporary work. The Authorisation is valid for 12 months after you enter
Ireland. You may not work for a single employer for more than 6 months. [
Applications ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/new-
zealand/wellington/services/visas/) must be submitted to the Embassy of
Ireland in Wellington or through the Embassy of Ireland in London if you are
resident in the UK. There is an application fee of $95 AZD.

###  South Korea

Citizens of South Korean can apply for a Working Holiday Authorisation. This
gives you permission to live and work in Ireland for up to 12 months. The
Irish Embassy in Korea provides [ Korean language documents
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/republic-of-korea/seoul/services/visas/working-
holiday-programme/) with details of the programme.

###  Taiwan

The Working Holiday Programme allows up to 400 citizens of Taiwan between the
ages of 18 and 30 to live and work in Ireland for up to 12 months. You may
also study for up to 6 months. Applications from citizens of Taiwan are dealt
with by the [ Immigration Service Delivery (ISD)
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-work-in-ireland/what-are-my-
options-for-working-in-ireland/coming-to-work-for-more-than-90-days/working-
holidays-in-ireland/) .

###  USA

To be eligible for the Working Holiday Authorisation you must be a US citizen
who is currently enrolled in full-time third level education or has graduated
from such a programme in the past 12 months. You must apply directly to the
relevant [ Consulate General or Embassy
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/usa/washington/) . The fees they charge vary from
$352 to $360 USD. The application process is split into two stages. First you
submit your [ application and supporting documents
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/usa/washington/services/visas/working-holiday-
authorisation/) . Once this has been approved you must provide a return plane
ticket, evidence of medical/travel insurance and your original passport. You
can submit your application by post or in person.

##  Where to apply

###  Embassy of Ireland in Buenos Aires

Edificio Bluesky,  
Av. del Libertador 1068,  
Recoleta,  
Buenos Aires,  
Argentina

**Tel:** +54 11 4808-5700

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/argentina/buenosaires/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/argentina/buenosaires/)

###  Embassy of Ireland in Australia

20 Arkana Street  
Yarralumla  
ACT 2600  
Australia

**Tel:** +61 2 62140000

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/australia/canberra/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/australia/canberra/)

###  Embassy of Ireland in Canada

Suite 1105, (11th Floor)  
130 Albert St  
Ottawa,  
Ontario, K1P 5G4

**Tel:** \+ 1 613 233 6281

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/canada/ottawa/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/canada/ottawa/)

###  Embassy of Ireland in Chile

Apoquindo 2929,  
Piso 18  
Las Condes  
Chile

**Tel:** +56 2 3304 6600

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/chile/santiago/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/chile/santiago/)

###  Consulate General of Ireland in Hong Kong

20/F, 33 Des Voeux Road,  
Central,  
Hong Kong

**Tel:** (+852) 2535 0700

**Homepage:** [ https://www.dfa.ie/irish-consulate/hong-kong/
](https://www.dfa.ie/irish-consulate/hong-kong/)

###  Embassy of Ireland in Japan

Ireland House,  
2-10-7,  
Kojimachi,  
Chiyoda-ku,  
Tokyo 102-0083,  
Japan

**Tel:** (03) 3263-0695

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/japan/tokyo/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/japan/tokyo/)

###  Embassy of Ireland in New Zealand

Te Aka Aorere o Airangi  
Level 10, 86 Victoria Street  
Wellington 6011  
New Zealand

**Tel:** \+ 64 (4) 471 2252

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/new-zealand/wellington/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/new-zealand/wellington/)

###  Embassy of Ireland in Republic of Korea

Leema Bldg. 13F.,  
42, Jongro 1-gil,  
Jongno-gu,  
Seoul, Korea 03152

**Tel:** (02) 721 7200

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/republic-of-korea/seoul/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/republic-of-korea/seoul/)

###  Garda National Immigration Bureau

13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
Ireland  
D02 XK70

**Homepage:** [ http://www.garda.ie/Controller.aspx?Page=31
](http://www.garda.ie/Controller.aspx?Page=31)

**Email:** [ gnib_dv@garda.ie ](mailto:gnib_dv@garda.ie)

###  Embassy of Ireland in the United States of America

2234 Massachusetts Ave NW  
Washington DC 20008  
USA

**Tel:** +1 202 462 3939

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ireland.ie/en/usa/washington/
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/usa/washington/)

_**Page edited:** 9 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/working-holiday-visa-in-
Ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Working%20Holiday%20Visas%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/working-holiday-visa-in-
Ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/working-holiday-visa-in-
Ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Working%20Holiday%20Visas%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/working-holiday-visa-in-
Ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Working Holiday Visas for Irish citizens_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/working-abroad/working-holidays-for-irish-citizens/)

Irish citizens can apply to go to certain countries to travel and work for a
limited time.

1828.9272

  * [ _Working in Ireland after living abroad_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/working-in-Ireland-after-living-abroad/)

This page includes the key things to consider if you plan to work when you
return to Ireland. It covers finding a job, your employment rights and the
taxes you have to pay.

1336.7113

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and working in construction_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/returning-to-ireland-and-working-in-construction/)

Provides information on careers in construction, Safepass, certifications, and
recognition of foreign qualifications, as well as details about trade unions,
wages, and pensions for those returning to Ireland and seeking to begin or
continue work in the construction industry.

1262.5051

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

