**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Moving abroad ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/) > [ Leaving Ireland
](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/) > Documentation and other
requirements when leaving Ireland

#  Documentation and other requirements when leaving Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Documents to bring with you 
  * Authentication 
  * Emergency contact details 

##  Introduction

If you are leaving Ireland, you may be travelling for reasons of work, study,
holiday or retirement abroad. Whatever it is you intend to do, you will need
to take with you certain documentation (for example, proof of your
citizenship, identity, address in Ireland). It is always easier to get hold of
these documents while you are still in Ireland than retrospectively to seek
these items when you move abroad.

The Department of Foreign Affairs has developed a [ free smartphone app called
TravelWise ](https://www.dfa.ie/travelwise/) which has travel advice and
consular information on 200 countries. The app is available from the Apple and
Android stores.

##  Documents to bring with you

It is always highly recommended that you bring your passport with you, even if
you are [ travelling to the UK ](/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-
uk/common-travel-area-between-ireland-and-the-uk/) and your passport is not a
requirement for travel. In fact, given Ireland is not a member of the [
Schengen Agreement, ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-
union/schengen-area/) you will find that you are required to carry your
passport when travelling to most other countries. If you need information
about [ applying for an Irish passport ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/passports/applying-for-or-renewing-an-irish-passport/) you can find
this information elsewhere on this site.

In addition to your passport, other useful documents include:

  * Your birth certificate 
  * Your [ driving licence ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/full-driving-licence/) and/or [ international driving permit ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/international-driving-permit/)
  * Your student card 
  * Any visas or work permits you may need 
  * [ European Health Insurance Card ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-abroad/european-health-insurance-card/) and/or other documents relating to health insurance 
  * Your curriculum vitae 
  * Any relevant certificates from education or training courses you have completed 
  * References for work 
  * Emergency contact information 
  * Contact names and numbers of your family/friends/next-of-kin in Ireland 

Before you travel, it can be useful to make photocopies of the most important
of these documents. Carry the photocopies separately so that you will have
some form of identification in the event that they are stolen.

If you are going to remote areas where you will be far from an Irish embassy,
leave two passport photographs and two signatures, ideally on a passport
application form, with friends in Ireland or near an Irish embassy. If your
passport is lost or stolen this could speed up the process of replacing it.

If you are travelling in countries where there are a lot of restrictions, it
can be useful to bring a number of passport photographs with you, for use on
additional visas and permits.

##  Authentication

###  Documents

When you are abroad, you may need to use Irish documents, for example, a birth
certificate, either for personal or business reasons. You may be asked to have
them authenticated by the Department of Foreign Affairs. Authenticating a
document means verifying that a signature, seal or stamp on a document is
genuine. Another type of authentication is an [ apostille stamp
](http://www.notarypublic.ie/apostille-and-legalisation/) which is an
international certification. It authenticates or legally certifies a document
and it may be required by countries that have acceded to the [ Hague
Convention ](http://www.hcch.net/index_en.php) .

Since 16 February 2019, EU citizens moving to another EU country no longer
need to get a stamp to prove that their [ public documents
](https://beta.e-justice.europa.eu/551/EN/public_documents) are authentic.
This means that birth, death, marriage and civil partnership certificates
issued by the [ General Register Office (GRO)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/af7893-general-register-office/) and the [
certificate of freedom to marry ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
married/getting-married-abroad/) issued by the Department of Foreign Affairs
are accepted by authorities in other EU states as authentic.

To reduce the need for translation within the EU, multilingual standard forms
are also available on request from the GRO for birth, death, marriage and
civil partnership certificates.

You can find more information about [ authenticating documents
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/consular-
services/authenticating-apostilles/) .

###  Fingerprints

If you are planning to travel to a country for which you need a visa, you may
be asked to provide fingerprints as part of your visa application. To get a
certificate of your fingerprints you should contact your local Garda station
to find out which Garda stations provide this service. It involves taking your
fingerprints and giving you a card with a set of your fingerprints and stamped
by the Garda station.

##  Emergency contact details

The Department of Foreign Affairs recommends that you make a note of the
contact details of the [ nearest Irish embassy or consulate
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) while you are abroad in case you
need to contact them urgently. You are also advised to leave your own contact
details with someone at home who can pass them to the [ Consular Section of
the Department of Foreign Affairs ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-
travel/consular-services/) in the event of an emergency.

You can also [ register your contact details with the Department of Foreign
Affairs ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/overseas-travel/citizens-
registration/) . Irish citizens travelling or living overseas are encouraged
to register their contact details with the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Registration is voluntary, but it will allow the Department to provide
assistance, if necessary and possible.

_**Page edited:** 22 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/other-useful-
documents/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Documentation%20and%20other%20requirements%20when%20leaving%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/other-useful-
documents/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/other-useful-
documents/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Documentation%20and%20other%20requirements%20when%20leaving%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/other-useful-
documents/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Finding somewhere to live when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/finding-somewhere-to-live-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to find accommodation when you return to
Ireland.

1094.693

  * [ _Enrol your child in primary school when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-primary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)

Information on choosing a primary school, how to apply for a school place,
receiving an offer and where to find help if you canâ€™t find a suitable school.

964.7017

  * [ _Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)

Information on buying car insurance after you return to Ireland, how to use
your claims free driving experience from abroad and what to do if you are
refused insurance cover.

953.9107

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

