**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Capital taxes ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/capital-taxes/) > Capital taxes following separation, divorce or
dissolution

#  Capital taxes following separation, divorce or dissolution

  * Introduction 
  * Capital Gains Tax 
  * Capital Acquisitions Tax 
  * Stamp Duty 

##  Introduction

When spouses or civil partners decide to separate and the separation is likely
to be permanent, it can affect the way they are taxed.

Here we explain the implications on capital taxes for separating married
couples or civil partners. You can also read about [ how income tax is
affected by separation or divorce ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-
and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-reliefs/) .

For cohabiting couples who are separating, read about [ Taxation of cohabiting
couples ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-and-cohabiting-couples/) .

##  Capital Gains Tax

You dispose of an asset when you:

  * Sell it 
  * Give it as a gift 
  * Exchange it 
  * Get compensation or insurance for it 

If you dispose of an asset that has increased in value since you got it, the
increase is taxable under [ Capital Gains Tax (CGT)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-gains-tax/) .

Transfers of assets between spouses or civil partners are exempt from CGT.

Transfers of assets between spouses or civil partners who are separated are
also exempt from CGT if the transfer is made under a  deed of separation  or a
court order.

Transfers of assets between spouses or civil partners following a court order
in a [ decree of divorce ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-
divorce/divorce-decrees/) or [ decree of dissolution ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/getting-a-dissolution/) are also exempt
from CGT. Transfers after the granting of a decree are not exempt if they are
not ordered by the court.

Separating couples should seek specialist tax advice before entering into
arrangements that have Capital Gains Tax implications.

##  Capital Acquisitions Tax

If you get a gift or inheritance, you may have to pay [ Capital Acquisitions
Tax (CAT) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) .

Gifts or inheritances you get from your spouse or civil partner are exempt
from CAT. This exemption is not affected if you are separated but it is
affected by a divorce or dissolution.

CAT does not apply to a property transfer between a separated or divorced
couple if it is ordered by a court

Separating couples should seek specialist tax advice before entering into
arrangements that have Capital Acquisitions Tax implications.

##  Stamp Duty

Stamp duty is tax you pay when you transfer property. .

Transfers of property between spouses or civil partners are exempt from stamp
duty.

If spouses or civil partners are separated or divorced, transfers of property
which are ordered by a court are exempt from stamp duty.

Read [ more information about stamp duty ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/stamp-duty/) .

###  Further information

You can read more about [ capital taxes following separation, divorce,
dissolution of civil partnership and civil annulment
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/life-events-and-personal-circumstances/marital-
status/separation-divorce-and-civil-annulment/transfer-of-assets-and-property-
between-former-partners.aspx) on Revenue's website.

_**Page edited:** 24 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-
divorce/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Capital%20taxes%20following%20separation%2C%20divorce%20or%20dissolution&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-
divorce/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-
divorce/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Capital%20taxes%20following%20separation%2C%20divorce%20or%20dissolution&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-
divorce/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Succession rights following a separation, divorce or dissolution_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/succession/)

Your succession rights relate to your inheritance, and these rights can change
following a separation or divorce.

2775.9731

  * [ _Separation, divorce and income tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-reliefs/)

A change in your personal circumstances following separation or divorce may
have implications for how you are taxed. This page explains how income and
maintenance is taxed after separation or divorce.

2176.5376

  * [ _Capital Acquisitions Tax exemptions and reliefs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax-exemptions-and-reliefs/)

Some types of gifts and inheritances are exempt from Capital Acquisitions Tax
(CAT). Others qualify for reliefs that reduce the amount of CAT you have to
pay.

2165.0789

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

