**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Moving country and taxation ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/) > Tax residence and domicile in Ireland

#  Tax residence and domicile in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Residence for tax purposes 
  * Choosing to be resident for tax purposes 
  * Ordinary residence 
  * Residence and married couples or civil partners 
  * What is domicile in Ireland? 
  * Tax implications 
  * Contact 

##  Introduction

Your liability for tax in Ireland can be affected by whether you are resident
in the country and whether Ireland is your permanent home. There is a specific
definition of residence for tax purposes depending on how many days you spend
in the country. If you are not resident in a particular year, Ireland can
still be your ‘ordinary residence’ since this term refers to the country where
you are usually resident over a number of years. The country that is your
permanent home is known as your _domicile_ .

##  Residence for tax purposes

Your residence for tax purposes depends on the number of days that you are
present in Ireland during a tax year. A tax year runs from 1 January to 31
December.

You are resident for tax purposes for a year if:

  * You spend 183 days or more in Ireland in that year or, 
  * If you spend 280 days or more in Ireland over a period of 2 consecutive tax years, you will be regarded as resident for the second tax year. For example, if you spend 140 days here in Year 1 and 150 days here in Year 2, you will be resident in Ireland for Year 2. You must be in Ireland for a minimum of 31 days each year. 

You are treated as being present in Ireland for a day if you are present at
any time during that day.

##  Choosing to be resident for tax purposes

If you arrive in Ireland in a particular year but do not have the required
number of days for tax purposes, you can still choose to be resident for that
year if you will be resident in the following year.

You must inform Revenue in writing if you choose to be tax resident in Ireland
in a tax year. [ Contact Revenue ](https://revenue.ie/en/contact-
us/Index.aspx) for details.

##  Ordinary residence

Your pattern of residence over a number of years is taken into account to
decide your ‘ordinary residence’.

If you have been resident for the previous 3 tax years, then you become
ordinarily resident from the start of the fourth year. If you leave the
country, you will continue to be ordinarily resident until you have been non-
resident for 3 continuous tax years. See revenue.ie for [ more information on
ordinary residence ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/tax-
residence/ordinarily-resident-tax-purposes.aspx) .

##  Residence and married couples or civil partners

For a married couple or civil partners, the residence status of each spouse is
assessed independently of the other. It is possible for one spouse or civil
partner to be resident and the other to be non-resident. . If you are resident
and your spouse is not, you are treated as single for tax purposes.

However, if you are resident and employed in Ireland but your spouse or civil
partner is not resident in Ireland and has no income - so that your earnings
are the only source of income - then it may be possible to claim the [ Married
or Civil Partner's Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-
married-people/) and the [ increased tax rate band ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) . You can do this after the
end of the tax year when you file a return of income which includes a
declaration about your spouse or civil partner's income.

##  What is domicile in Ireland?

Your domicile is the country where you live with the intention of remaining
there permanently. It may be different to your residence or nationality.

When you are born, you have a _domicile of origin_ . This domicile can be
changed to a _domicile of choice,_ if you move to a different country with the
intention of living there permanently.

###  Irish domicile levy

You may have to pay a domicile levy if:

  * You are Irish domiciled 
  * Your worldwide income in the year exceeds €1m 
  * You have Irish property with a value greater than €5m, and 
  * Your Irish income tax for the year is less than €200,000 

The amount of the levy is €200,000 per year. Any Irish income tax paid by you
in a tax year is allowed as a credit when calculating the amount of domicile
levy due for that year.

The levy is payable each year on or before 31 October in the year following
the valuation date (on a [ self-assessment basis
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/guide-to-self-
assessment/index.aspx) ). The valuation date is 31 December each year. For
example, the levy for the year 2023 is due and payable on or before 31 October
2024. You can get [ more information about the domicile levy from Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/tax-residence/domicile-domicile-
levy.aspx) .

##  Tax implications

Residence and domicile are taken into account for a number of taxes including
[ income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) ,
[ Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-on-
savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-tax/) , [ gift tax
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) , [
inheritance tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-
tax/) and [ Capital Gains Tax
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/cgt/leaflets/index.html) .

##  Contact

Telephone numbers and contact details for Revenue tax sections are available
on the revenue.ie website [ contact page ](https://revenue.ie/en/contact-
us/Index.aspx) .

_**Page edited:** 2 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-residence-and-domicile-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20residence%20and%20domicile%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-residence-and-domicile-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-residence-and-domicile-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20residence%20and%20domicile%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-residence-and-domicile-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1752.664

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

1462.8704

  * [ _How your income tax is calculated_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/)

Tax on income you earn from employment is deducted directly from your pay.
Find out how this tax is calculated.

1346.7874

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

