**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Tax credits and reliefs for people with
disabilities ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-
disabilities/) > Tax relief on employing a home carer

#  Tax relief on employing a home carer

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

You can claim tax relief on the cost of employing a carer if you employ one
for yourself or for another family member.

You can employ the carer directly or you can use an agency that employs
carers. If you employ the carer yourself, you should [ register as an employer
](https://revenue.ie/en/employing-people/becoming-an-employer-and-ongoing-
obligations/registration-of-employers-for-paye-purposes/index.aspx) and you
will be responsible for your employee's tax and social insurance ( [ PAYE
](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/starting-work/tax-and-
starting-work/) , Universal Social Charge and [ PRSI ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-
insurance/) ). You will also have other duties and obligations as an employer,
for example regarding [ hours of work ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/hours-of-work/working-hours/) , [ contracts of employment
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-
employment/contract-of-employment/) , [ pay slips ](/en/employment/employment-
rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/pay-slip/) , [ holidays
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/annual-
leave/) and the [ minimum wage ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-wage/) .  
  
If you pay an agency to provide the carer, the agency will employ the carer
and be responsible for their tax and social insurance. You can still claim tax
relief on the cost of paying the agency to provide a carer.

##  Rules

If you employ a carer for yourself or on behalf of a family member, you can
claim the tax relief on the cost of that care. A _family member_ is a spouse,
civil partner, child or a relative, including a relation by marriage or civil
partnership.

The person being cared for must be totally incapacitated throughout the tax
year (January to December) in which you are claiming the tax relief, however,
this is not a requirement for the first year that you prove the person is
totally incapacitated. The carer does not have to be employed for the full tax
year. The term _totally incapacitated_ means that the person being cared for
is disabled and requires a carer.

You cannot claim tax relief for employing a carer if the carer only carries
out housekeeper duties or if a [ Dependent Relative Tax Credit ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/dependent-
relative-tax-credit/) or an [ Incapacitated Child Tax Credit ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/incapacitated-
child-tax-credit/) has already been granted.

You may be asked by the Revenue Commissioners to get a medical certificate to
confirm the nature of the disability but it is not necessary to send one in
with your application form.

###  Home nursing

You can claim tax relief on the cost of [ employing a qualified nurse at home
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/employing-a-carer/health-expenses-for-home-
nursing.aspx) . Tax relief for nursing at home is claimed as a [ health
expense ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-
medical-expenses/) .

##  Rates

Tax allowances and reliefs reduce the amount of tax that you have to pay. The
amount by which this relief will reduce your tax depends on your rate of tax.
[ You can find out more about how your income tax is calculated ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) .

You can claim tax relief (at your highest rate) on the lower of the following
two amounts:

  * The actual cost incurred or 
  * The maximum of €75,000 

You must claim the relief each year. You can get tax relief on the cost of
employing a carer, less any amount recovered from the [ Health Service
Executive (HSE) ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) . If two
or more of you pay for the care, the relief is divided between you in
proportion to the amount each paid.  

##  How to apply

Use [ Revenue’s myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/sign_in.html) to
claim the relief for employing a carer. Alternatively, you can complete [ Form
HK1 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/documents/form-hk1.pdf) and submit it to your Revenue office during
the tax year or after the year ends. A claim for tax relief must be made
within four years after the end of the tax year to which the claim relates.  

_**Page edited:** 4 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-
for-employing-a-home-carer/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20relief%20on%20employing%20a%20home%20carer&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-
for-employing-a-home-carer/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-for-
employing-a-home-carer/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20relief%20on%20employing%20a%20home%20carer&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-
for-employing-a-home-carer/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax relief on nursing home fees and for dependent relatives_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-for-dependent-relatives/)

Tax relief is available on fees paid for nursing homes and for dependent
relatives. Information on tax credits and how to apply for tax relief.

2947.6824

  * [ _Tax relief and other tax issues for people renting_ ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-renting/tax-issues-for-renters/)

Gives information about the new Rent Tax Credit. Describes the requirement to
deduct tax from your rent payments if your landlord lives abroad, unless you
pay rent through a collection agent.

2294.5852

  * [ _Tax relief on assistance dogs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-on-assistance-dogs/)

Assistance dogs are specially trained dogs that help people with a disability
carry out practical tasks. If you own an assistance dog, you can claim tax
relief.

2142.007

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

