**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Loans and credit
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/) > Your credit history

#  Your credit history

  * Introduction 
  * How lenders use your credit record 
  * What is the Central Credit Register? 
  * What information is on the Central Credit Register? 
  * Your credit report 
  * How to check your credit report 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Your credit history is information about your loans. It includes details such
as:

  * The type of loans 
  * The amount the loans were for 
  * The amount remaining 
  * Any missed payments 

This information is listed in a credit report.

Lenders can get a credit report when they are deciding on loan applications.

Credit reports are held by the Central Credit Register (CCR). The Central
Credit Register does not give a credit score or credit rating. Your lender
decides on your loan application based on their own lending policy.

You can request a copy of your own credit report online or apply by post.

If you are applying for an overdraft, mortgage, credit card or other type of
loan, you can check your credit report before you apply. It can help you spot
any missed payments you are not aware of or mistakes in your credit report.

You can get incorrect information corrected. You also have the right to add a
statement to your credit report to explain any special circumstance.

This page outlines how lenders use your credit record, what information is on
it and how you can check it and change it.

##  How lenders use your credit record

When you apply for a loan or other credit, the lender can use your credit
history when deciding whether or not to lend to you.

Examples of credit include:

  * Credit cards 
  * Overdrafts 
  * Hire purchase 
  * Personal contract plans (PCPs) 

The information on your credit report can be used to decide:

  * Whether to lend to you 
  * How much to lend you 
  * How much interest to charge 

Lenders may check your credit report when you:

  * Apply for a new loan 
  * Apply to have an existing loan restructured 
  * Have arrears on a loan 
  * Have gone over the limit of a credit card or overdraft 

When you apply for a loan, the lender must check the Central Credit Register
if the loan is for €2,000 or more.

Lenders can also check the Central Credit Register if you apply for a loan
under €2,000 or:

  * You have requested a re-structure of an existing loan 
  * There are arrears on an existing loan or a breach of a limit on a credit card or overdraft 

The [ Credit Reporting Act 2013
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2013/act/45/front/revised/en/html) sets
out the rules for the Central Credit Register.

####  Consent

Lenders do not need your consent to check the Central Credit Register.

If the lender wants permission to check your credit history on another
database they may need your permission. Usually, this consent is part of your
contract or agreement when you first apply for a loan, so you may not notice
that you are giving consent.

###  What happens if you are refused a loan?

If you are refused a loan because of information in your credit report, the
lender must tell you this.

This applies to personal [ consumer credit agreements ](/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/glossary-of-debt-terms/) for amounts between €200
and €75,000. It does not apply to mortgages.

##  What is the Central Credit Register?

The [ Central Credit Register ](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/)
provides credit reports to borrowers and lenders. It is a database that stores
personal and credit information on loans of €500 or more. It is operated by
the Central Bank of Ireland.

The Central Credit Register started to record loans from 30 June 2017. It
keeps a record for 5 years after the last payment for a loan is made.

The Central Credit Register does not decide whether you get a loan. Lenders
use the credit report to assess your loan application. They may also take into
consideration your income and expenses, such as rent and utilities. Different
lenders have different criteria for approving loans.

**The Irish Credit Bureau**

The Irish Credit Bureau (ICB) provided a credit rating service until 30
September 2021. It was a private organisation owned by its members, mainly
financial institutions. The ICB deleted its records after it stopped providing
the service.

##  What information is on the Central Credit Register?

Loans for €500 or more are included on the Central Credit Register.

From June 2017, it includes:

  * Credit cards 
  * Mortgages 
  * Overdrafts 
  * Personal loans 

From 31 March 2018, it includes:

  * Local authority loans 
  * Moneylender loans 
  * Business loans 

From 30 June 2019, it includes:

  * Hire purchase agreements 
  * Asset finance 
  * Personal contract plans (PCPs) 

The information about the loan includes the:

  * Type of loan (for example, credit card, mortgage, overdraft, personal loan) 
  * Name of the lender 
  * Amount of the loan 
  * Outstanding balance 
  * Number of overdue payments, if any 
  * Date of next payment 
  * Amount of next payment 

####  What debts are not included?

The following information is not included on the Central Credit Register:

  * Utility bills 
  * Pawnbrokers’ records 
  * Income and salary information 
  * Courts Service records – such as information about instalment orders or attachments of earnings 
  * Insolvency Service of Ireland records (such as information about debt relief notices, personal insolvency or bankruptcy) 
  * Deposit accounts 
  * Tax liabilities 
  * COVID payment breaks 

Up to 30 September 2020, lenders could grant a payment break of up to 6 months
for businesses and personal customers, due to COVID-19. If you agreed a
COVID-19 payment break with your lender, it will not be identified on your
credit report and no missed payments will be shown.

####  What information about me is held on the database?

Personal information on the database includes your:

  * Name 
  * Date of birth 
  * Current and previous addresses 
  * Personal Public Service (PPS) number 
  * Gender 
  * Eircode 
  * Telephone number 

##  Your credit report

You can request your credit report free of charge at any time (a limit may be
put on excessive free requests).

You can go to the Central Credit Register website to see a [ sample credit
report and explanation of terms (pdf)
](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/media/1550/6-sample-credit-report-and-
explanation-of-terms.pdf) .

####  Is there a rating or score on my credit report?

Credit scoring, or credit rating, is a technique that summarises your credit
status at a particular point in time.

The Central Credit Register does not score or grade credit reports. Your
lender will make a decision on your loan application based on their own credit
policy.

####  Who else can access my credit report?

Only lenders can access your credit report.

No-one else can access your credit report on the Central Credit Register
without your consent, for example, employers or landlords.

####  How do I know who has looked at my report?

Your credit report shows each time a lender has viewed your information and
the reason they did so. This is called a ‘footprint’. It means that you know
who has looked at your credit report and when.

###  Request a change to your credit report

If you believe there is inaccurate, incomplete or out-of-date information in
your credit report, you can apply to change it.

You can find out more in the factsheet [ How to request an amendment to
information on my credit report (pdf)
](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/media/1601/5-how-to-request-an-
amendment-to-my-credit-report-final.pdf) .

If you believe you have been impersonated by someone else, you can place a
notice of suspected impersonation on your report.

####  Add a statement to your credit report

You can [ add a personal statement to your credit record to clarify it (pdf)
](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/media/1730/3-placing-an-explanatory-
statement-on-my-credit-report-final.pdf) . This is known as an ‘explanatory
statement’.

For example, if you have had significant expenses due to relationship
breakdown, bereavement, illness or another cause, you may add these details to
your record.

The statement must be factual, relevant to the information in the credit
report, and under 200 words. It should not contain information that could
identify another individual (such as their name or workplace).

The statement is added to your credit report and it can be viewed when your
data is accessed. However, lenders do not have to take your statement into
account when assessing you for a loan.

##  How to check your credit report

You can get a copy of your credit report by [ applying online
](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/borrower-area/apply-for-your-credit-
report-and-other-rights/) to the Central Credit Register or [ by email or
post. ](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/borrower-area/contact-us/)

As part of the application, the Central Credit Register will need [ proof of
your identity ](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie/borrower-area/apply-for-
your-credit-report-and-other-rights/identification-documents/) : your name,
address and Personal Public Service Number (PPSN).

If you are applying by email, you must print, sign and scan your completed
application form. Attach it to your email along with your identification
documents.

If you are applying by post, you will need to enclose proof of your identity
with your signed application form.

##  Where to apply

###  Central Credit Register

First Floor  
Block E  
Adelphi Plaza  
George's Street Upper  
Dún Laoghaire  
Co Dublin

**Tel:** (01) 224 5500

**Homepage:** [ https://www.centralcreditregister.ie
](https://www.centralcreditregister.ie)

**Email:** [ myrequest@centralcreditregister.ie
](mailto:myrequest@centralcreditregister.ie)

_**Page edited:** 20 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-credit-
history/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Your%20credit%20history&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-credit-
history/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-credit-
history/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Your%20credit%20history&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/your-credit-
history/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Credit unions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/credit-unions/)

Credit unions are organisations of people that save together and lend to each
other at fair rates of interest.

1366.155

  * [ _Credit notes_ ](/en/consumer/shopping/credit-notes/)

Find out about your rights and rules around credit notes.

1357.5487

  * [ _Rent Tax Credit_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/housing-taxes-and-reliefs/rent-tax-credit/)

You can claim an income tax credit for rent paid. Find out how to qualify for
and apply for the credit.

1325.9133

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

