**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Tax on savings and investments ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/) > Deposit Interest Retention Tax
(DIRT)

#  Deposit Interest Retention Tax (DIRT)

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Exemptions and refunds 
  * How to apply for a refund or exemption 

##  Introduction

If you save an amount of money (a deposit), you may get paid an annual rate of
interest on it by your bank or financial service provider.

The interest you get is taxable. The tax is called Deposit Interest Retention
Tax (DIRT).

DIRT is charged at 33% on all interest payments. (In 2019, the rate was 35%.)

Credit union deposit interest and share dividends are subject to DIRT.

##  Rules

DIRT is deducted before the interest is paid to you. You are entitled to get a
statement of the DIRT deducted if you ask for it.

If you have paid DIRT, you do not have to pay any further income tax or
Universal Social Charge on the interest, but you must declare the interest as
income if you are making an income tax return.

In some circumstances, you may have to pay [ PRSI on deposit interest
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/#498bd1) .

DIRT does not apply to interest on deposits owned by:

  * Companies that are liable to corporation tax 
  * Charities 
  * People not resident for tax in Ireland (see also 'non-resident accountsâ€™ below) 
  * Revenue-approved pension schemes 

##  Exemptions and refunds

You may qualify for a refund of DIRT or to have your deposit interest paid
without a deduction of DIRT. If you qualify, you must  apply for a refund or
exemption  .

###  People aged over 65

You can get your deposit interest paid without the deduction of DIRT, or you
can claim a DIRT refund, if you are over 65 and:

  * Your income is less than the [ low income exemption limits for people aged over 65 ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) **or**
  * Your tax credits for the year (including your spouse's) amount to more than the tax that would be due on your (and your spouse's) income for the year 

Joint accounts can qualify if the account holders are spouses or civil
partners.

###  First-time buyers

If you are a first-time buyer who either buys or self-builds a new residential
property between **19 July 2016** and **31 December 2024** , you may be
entitled to claim a refund of income tax and DIRT you have paid over the
previous 4 tax years. Find out more about the [ Help to Buy Scheme
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-scheme/) .

###  People with disabilities

You can get your deposit interest paid without the deduction of DIRT, or get a
refund, if:

  * You are permanently incapacitated from maintaining yourself **and**
  * Your tax credits for the year (including your spouse's) amount to more than the tax that would be due on your (and your spouse's) income for the year 

[ You can get more information on the DIRT exemption for permanently
incapacitated individuals from Revenue ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-
incomes/dirt/who-is-exempt-from-dirt.aspx) .

###  Non-resident accounts

If you are not [ resident in Ireland for tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/moving-
country-and-taxation/tax-residence-and-domicile-in-ireland/) , you may get a
refund of DIRT that has been deducted from your Irish deposit interest. To get
a refund of DIRT, Ireland must have a double taxation agreement with the
country you are resident in. DIRT will be refunded under the terms of that
agreement. Fill in [ IC5 form (pdf) ](http://www.revenue.ie/ga/additional-
incomes/documents/form-ic5.pdf) to apply for a refund of DIRT.

If you are not resident, and do not pay tax, in Ireland, you may get your
Irish deposit interest paid without the deduction of DIRT. You do not have to
be a resident of a country that has a double taxation agreement with Ireland
to apply for a DIRT exemption. You should contact your financial institution
to find out if you can be exempt from paying DIRT. You will have to complete a
Non-Residence Declaration.

##  How to apply for a refund or exemption

Complete [ Form 54 Claims (pdf)
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax/it/forms/form54claims.pdf) to **apply for a
refund** **of DIRT** if you are:

  * Aged over 65 or 
  * Permanently incapacitated or 
  * A guardian or trustee of someone who is permanently incapacitated 

Send the completed form to [ your local Revenue office
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) .

###  Exemption

You can apply to have your deposit interest paid without the deduction of
DIRT:

  * If you are aged over 65 years of age, you must complete [ form DE1 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-incomes/documents/dirt/form-de1.pdf) and return it to your financial institution (not Revenue) 
  * If you are permanently incapacitated, or a trustee of a special trust for a permanently incapacitated person, you must complete [ form DE2 (pdf) ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-incomes/documents/dirt/form-de2.pdf) and [ return it to Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx)

_**Page edited:** 2 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Deposit%20Interest%20Retention%20Tax%20%28DIRT%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Deposit%20Interest%20Retention%20Tax%20%28DIRT%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/deposit-interest-retention-
tax/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Interest on loans and savings_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/savings-and-investments/interest-on-loans-and-savings/)

If you borrow money you will be charged interest. If you save money you will
earn interest. Find out about the different terms used for interest charged or
earned.

2223.1355

  * [ _Mortgage interest tax credit_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/mortgage-interest-relief/)

A mortgage interest tax credit or relief is a tax relief based on the amount
of qualifying mortgage interest that you pay in a tax year for your home. A
new temporary mortgage interest tax credit was announced in Budget 2024. The
previous scheme ended on 1 January 2021.

2214.2622

  * [ _Mortgage Interest Supplement_ ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/mortgage-interest-supplement/)

Mortgage Interest Supplement provides short-term support to help you pay your
mortgage interest repayments. The Mortgage Interest Supplement scheme is
closed to new entrants and no new applications will be accepted.

1539.2966

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

