**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax/) > Taxation of cohabiting couples

#  Taxation of cohabiting couples

  * Introduction 
  * How cohabiting couples are taxed 
  * Tax reliefs for former cohabitants 

##  Introduction

You are cohabiting if you are living with someone in a committed relationship
but you are not married or in a civil partnership.

[ Cohabiting couples (cohabitants) do not have the same legal rights and
obligations as married couples or civil partners ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-
marriage/) .

You can read more about [ the legal rights of cohabiting couples ](/en/birth-
family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/) .

##  How cohabiting couples are taxed

Cohabiting couples are not taxed the same as married couples or civil
partners. In general, they are taxed as single individuals.

###  Income tax

Married couples can share their tax reliefs and allowances between them.
Cohabiting couples are taxed as single individuals.

[ Read about how your income tax is calculated ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) .

###  Capital Acquisition Tax

[ Capital Acquisitions Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-
acquisitions-tax/) (CAT) is a tax on gifts or inheritances. Transfers between
spouses and civil partners are exempt from CAT.

If you get a gift or inheritance from a relative, it is tax free up to a
certain amount depending on the relationship.

If you get a gift or inheritance from your cohabitant, it is taxed in the same
way as if it was from someone who is not related to you. The lowest tax-free
threshold applies.

If your cohabiting partner dies when you are still in a relationship together,
you may be able to apply to court for a portion of their estate. A gift or
inheritance is exempt from CAT if it is made by court order in this way under
the [ redress scheme for cohabiting couples
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-
couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/#l87f4e) .

##  Tax reliefs for former cohabitants

If your cohabiting relationship ends, you may be entitled to tax relief if a
court orders:

  * You to make maintenance payments to your former partner 
  * A transfer of assets between you 

To be a qualifying cohabitant for these reliefs you must have been cohabiting
for at least:

  * 5 years or 
  * 2 years if you are the parents of a dependent child 

###  Maintenance payments

If you make legally enforceable maintenance payments to benefit your former
partner, you can deduct them from your income to reduce the tax you pay.

Read more about [ how maintenance payments are taxed ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/) .

###  Property transfers

If a court orders your former cohabitant to transfer property to you, you do
not have to pay [ Capital Acquisitions Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) or [ stamp duty
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/property/stamp-duty/index.aspx) .

If a court orders you to transfer an asset to your former cohabitant, you do
not have to pay [ Capital Gains Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-gains-tax/) or stamp duty.

_**Page edited:** 24 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-and-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Taxation%20of%20cohabiting%20couples&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-and-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/tax-and-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Taxation%20of%20cohabiting%20couples&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-and-cohabiting-
couples/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rights of cohabiting couples (couples living together)_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/)

Couples living together have some rights and obligations, but they do not have
the same rights and obligations as married couples or civil partnerships

1751.7825

  * [ _Redress scheme for cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-couples/)

What is the redress scheme for cohabitants and who qualifies?

1710.4482

  * [ _Inheritance rights of cohabiting couples_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/inheritance-rights-cohabiting-couples/)

Cohabiting couples have no automatic right to inheritance on the death of
either partner. What are your rights, and find out how you can plan and make
provisions for dependants.

1671.0321

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

