**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Asylum seekers and refugees ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/)
> [ The asylum process in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/) > International protection and the
powers of the Minister for Justice

#  International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice

  * Introduction 
  * Recommendations of the International Protection Office (IPO) 
  * The Minister’s power to revoke a declaration 
  * Deportation orders 

##  Introduction

After your [ application for international protection ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/applying-
for-refugee-status-in-ireland/) has been examined, the International
Protection Office sends its recommendation to the Minister for Justice. This
is also called the ‘first instance decision’. The IPO makes one of the
following recommendations:

  * That you should be declared a [ refugee ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/refugees-asylum-seekers-introduction#lad40a)
  * That you should be declared a person with [ subsidiary protection ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/refugees-asylum-seekers-introduction#l50016)
  * That you should not be declared either a refugee or a person with subsidiary protection 

You can [ appeal the recommendation of the IPO ](/en/moving-country/asylum-
seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/if-your-application-for-
refugee-status-is-refused/) if it has not granted you a refugee or subsidiary
protection declaration to the International Protection Appeals Tribunal. If
you do not appeal, or your appeal is not successful, the Minister will decide
if you should be granted [ permission to remain in Ireland ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-
remain/permission-to-remain/) or not.

The Minister will usually follow the recommendation of the IPO or the
International Protection Appeals Tribunal (IPAT) to grant or refuse you a
refugee or subsidiary protection declaration. The Minister can refuse you a
refugee protection declaration at this stage if:

  * There are reasonable grounds for regarding you as a danger to the security of Ireland 
  * You have been convicted (either in Ireland or another country) of a serious crime and you constitute a danger to the community 
  * Your application for international protection was [ withdrawn ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/withdrawing-from-the-asylum-process-in-ireland/)

##  Recommendations of the International Protection Office (IPO)

The IPO makes a recommendation on your application. They send the
recommendation to you (or your legal representative) and to the Minister for
Justice. You can appeal this recommendation to the International Protection
Appeals Board (IPAT).

###  If the IPO or IPAT recommends you should be granted international
protection

If the IPO (or IPAT) recommend that you be declared a refugee or that you
should be granted subsidiary protection, the Minister usually issues a
decision based on this recommendation. The Minister can still refuse to grant
you a refugee declaration if:

  * There are reasonable grounds for regarding you as a danger to the security of Ireland 
  * You have been convicted (either in Ireland or another country) of a serious crime and you constitute a danger to the community 
  * Your application for international protection was [ withdrawn ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/withdrawing-from-the-asylum-process-in-ireland/)

If the Minister refuses your application for these reasons, you cannot appeal
this decision to IPAT. You may be able to apply to the High Court for a
judicial review of the decision. You should get legal advice about this.

When you get a decision from the Minister that declares you are a refugee or
have subsidiary protection, you must [ register and get an Irish Residence
Permit ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-
ireland/registration-of-non-eea-nationals-in-ireland/) . You can read about
the [ rights you have as a person with refugee or subsidiary protection status
](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-
remain/your-rights-when-you-get-international-protection/) .

###  If the IPO or IPAT recommends you should not be granted international
protection

If you do not appeal the decision, the Minister will then examine your
application to see if you should be granted [ permission to remain
](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-
remain/permission-to-remain/) . The Minister also advises you of your right to
voluntarily return to the country you came from. If you decide to [
voluntarily return ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/voluntary-returns/) , you will be helped to do
this.

If you are not granted refugee status and you are granted subsidiary
protection instead, you can appeal if you want to. If you declared a refugee
following the appeal, your subsidiary protection status will be removed.

If you did not appeal, or your appeal was not granted, and the Minister
decides to not grant you permission to remain, the Minister may then make a
deportation order.

##  The Minister’s power to revoke a declaration

The minster can cancel (revoke) your refugee declaration if you:

  * Voluntarily return to live in the country of your nationality, or the country your left to become a refugee if you have no nationality 
  * Voluntarily reacquire your lost nationality 
  * Become the citizen of another country (not Ireland) which now protects you 
  * Can no longer continue to refuse the protection of the country of your nationality because the circumstances that led to you being recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist 
  * Have no nationality and are able to return to the country of your former habitual residence because the circumstances that led to you being recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist 
  * Have committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity 
  * Have committed a serious non-political crime outside of Ireland prior to your arrival 
  * Are guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations 
  * Pose a threat to national security or, having been convicted of a serious crime, a threat to the community in the State 
  * Were given a refugee declaration on the basis of information furnished which was false or misleading 

###  Revoking a subsidiary protection declaration

The Minister for Justice can also revoke a subsidiary protection declaration
given to a person where:

  * The circumstances that led to you being eligible for subsidiary protection have ceased to exist or have changed so that international protection is no longer required 
  * Were given a refugee declaration on the basis of information furnished which was false or misleading 

Some acts disqualify you from subsidiary protection and can be used by the
Minister to revoke a declaration:

  * You have committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity 
  * You have committed a serious crime 
  * You are guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations 
  * You pose a danger to the community or the security of the State 

###  Appeal against revocation

The Minister must notify you of their intention to revoke your declaration.
You then have 15 working days from the issue of the notification to make
representations to the Minister.

Where the Minister decides to revoke a declaration, you have 10 working days
from the sending of the notice containing the decision and the reasons for it
to appeal to the Circuit Court.

##  Deportation orders

If the Minister for Justice has refused to give you a refugee or subsidiary
protection declaration or permission to remain, the Minister may make a
deportation order against you.

The notice of the [ deportation order ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-
situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-ireland/spouse-civil-partner-of-
irish-national-scheme/repatriation-division/) may require you to leave the
State within a specified period and to present yourself to a member of the
Garda Síochána or immigration officer at a date, time and place as specified
in the order.

Before making a deportation order, the Minister will notify you of their
intention to make the order. When notified you can make representations to the
Minister. The notification normally offers you the option to voluntarily leave
the State before a deportation order is made.

However, if you have been convicted of a serious crime or you are considered a
threat to national security, you cannot leave voluntarily. This means you will
be given a deportation order without an option to leave voluntarily and you
cannot later return to Ireland.

###  Detentions under the International Protection Act

You can be arrested and detained pending deportation where an immigration
officer or a member of An Garda Síochána, with reasonable cause, suspects that
you have a deportation order and you:

  * Have failed to comply with any provision of the order or with a requirement 
  * Intend to leave the State and enter another state illegally 
  * Have destroyed identity documents or is in possession of forged identity documents 
  * Intend to avoid deportation 

For the purposes of making an arrest, the officer may enter (using reasonable
force if necessary) and search any premises where the person is or where the
officer suspects the person is. If it is a place where people live, the
officer cannot enter without consent unless you are ordinarily resident there
or the officer has reasonable grounds for believing you are there.

_**Page edited:** 4 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-
for-justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=International%20protection%20and%20the%20powers%20of%20the%20Minister%20for%20Justice&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-
for-justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-
for-justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=International%20protection%20and%20the%20powers%20of%20the%20Minister%20for%20Justice&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-
for-justice/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/)

The Court of Justice of the European Union ensures that European law is
interpreted and applied in each member state. Find out about the other
important functions of this court.

2586.535

  * [ _Children and the criminal justice system_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/)

The Children Act 2001 regulates the treatment of children found in breach of
the criminal law.

2156.0742

  * [ _Role of the jury_ ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury/)

The jury fulfils a very important role in the legal system in Ireland. Who are
the jury and why is a jury not required in every case?

2140.4463

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

