**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > Income tax

#  Income tax

  * [ How your income tax is calculated ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/)

Tax on income you earn from employment is deducted directly from your pay.
Find out how this tax is calculated.

  * [ Universal Social Charge (USC) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/)

The Universal Social Charge is a tax on income.

  * [ Online services for PAYE taxpayers ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/online-services-for-paye-taxpayers/)

You can use Revenueâ€™s online service, myAccount, to manage your tax if you are
a PAYE taxpayer.

  * [ Taxation of married people and civil partners ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/)

There are three ways in which you can be taxed as a married person. Find out
about the different options.

  * [ Taxation of cohabiting couples ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-and-cohabiting-couples/)

Find out about how cohabiting couples are taxed.

  * [ Taxation of benefits from employment ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-benefits-from-employment/)

Employees can get certain benefits in addition to their salary or wages. Most
of these benefits are taxed.

  * [ How to review your tax for PAYE taxpayers ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-to-review-your-paye-tax/)

How to check if you have paid the right amount of tax and what to do if you
have paid too much or too little.

  * [ PAYE overpayments and underpayments of tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/paye-overpayments-and-underpayments-of-tax/)

This document explains how you can find out if you have underpaid or overpaid
tax. It also explains how to get a refund of tax or pay tax you may owe.

  * [ Tax on income that is not from your employer ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-return-non-paye-income/)

Some PAYE taxpayers have other sources of income. Information about how non-
PAYE income is taxed.

  * [ Tax for self-employed people ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-people/)

A summary of how you are taxed if you are self-employed.

  * [ Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

  * [ Artists' exemption from income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/artists-exemption-from-income-tax/)

Some income earned by artists, writers, sculptors and painters in Ireland from
the sale of their work may be exempt from income tax. How to obtain exemption
from income tax if you are an artist and satisfy certain criteria.

  * [ Case study: Calculating your income tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/case-study-calculating-your-income-tax-case-studies/)

Tax on income you earn from employment is deducted directly from your salary
(pay). A case study on how this tax is calculated.

  * [ Taxation of social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

Find out which social welfare payments are taxable, and which payments are
not.

**This document is in:** [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/)

  * [ Tax and starting work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/starting-work/tax-and-starting-work/)

Most employees have their tax deducted from their salary by their employer.
Find out what you need to know about tax when starting work.

**This document is in:** [ Starting work ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-
changing-job/starting-work/)

  * [ Tax, PRSI and pensions when changing job ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-changing-job/changing-job/change-job-tax-prsi/)

Important things to know about relating to your tax, social insurance
contributions (PRSI) and pension when you switch jobs.

**This document is in:** [ Changing job ](/en/employment/starting-work-and-
changing-job/changing-job/)

  * [ Taxation of lump sum payments ](/en/employment/retirement/income-tax-in-retirement/retirement-lump-sum-taxation/)

Lump sum payments in compensation for loss of employment are subject to tax.
How is tax calculated and what are your entitlements?

**This document is in:** [ Income tax in retirement
](/en/employment/retirement/income-tax-in-retirement/)

###  Most Read in "Income tax"

  1. [ How your income tax is calculated ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/)
  2. [ Taxation of married people and civil partners ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-married-people/)
  3. [ Universal Social Charge (USC) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/)
  4. [ Tax for self-employed people ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-people/)
  5. [ PAYE overpayments and underpayments of tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/paye-overpayments-and-underpayments-of-tax/)

