**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Tax credits and reliefs for people with
disabilities ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-
disabilities/) > Tax reliefs for people with a vision impairment

#  Tax reliefs for people with a vision impairment

  * Introduction 
  * Blind Person’s Tax Credit 
  * Guide Dog Allowance 
  * Value Added Tax (VAT) Refunds 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

If you are blind or partially sighted, you may entitled to a reduction in the
amount of tax that you pay.

Tax credits and reliefs reduce the amount of tax that you pay to [ Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie) . You can read about [ how your tax is calculated
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) for an
explanation of how they work.

If you are blind, you can claim the Blind Person’s Tax Credit.

If you have a guide dog, you can apply for the Guide Dog Allowance.

In addition, refunds are available for Value Added Tax (VAT) you have paid on
certain aids and appliances.

##  Blind Person’s Tax Credit

The [ Blind Person’s Tax Credit ](https://revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/blind-tax-credit/index.aspx) is €1,650.
For a married couple or civil partners, where both are blind, the credit is
€3,300.

Parents cannot claim a Blind Person’s Tax Credit in respect of any children
who are blind, but you can claim the [ Incapacitated Child Tax Credit
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-
disabilities/incapacitated-child-tax-credit/) .

To apply for the Blind Person's Tax Credit, you must have a certificate from
an ophthalmic surgeon (a doctor who performs eye surgery). The certificate
must state that either:

  * Your best vision is not better than 6/60 vision in the better eye with glasses or contact lenses or 
  * Your field of vision is limited to within an angle of 20 degrees or less 

The certificate should state whether the visual impairment is permanent or
temporary. If it is temporary, you will need a certificate for each year you
claim the credit. If it is permanent, you continue to get the tax credit
indefinitely.

##  Guide Dog Allowance

Guide dogs are especially trained to lead people who are blind or vision
impaired around obstacles.

You can get a tax allowance if you, or your spouse, have a trained guide dog.

The [ Guide Dog Allowance ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/guide-dog-allowance/index.aspx) is €825.
The relief is given at the standard income tax rate of 20%, so it reduces your
tax by €165 (20% of €825).

To claim the allowance you must have a letter from Irish Guide Dogs for the
Blind confirming that you are a registered owner.

##  Value Added Tax (VAT) Refunds

You can apply for a refund of VAT you have paid on certain aids and
appliances. For example:

  * Braille books or Braille writing equipment 
  * Specially adapted computer equipment 

[ Read more about VAT refunds on aids and appliances used by people with
disabilities ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-
disabilities/vat-refunds-on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-
disabilities/) .

##  How to apply

You can claim the Blind Person’s Tax Credit and Guide Dog Allowance online or
by using an application form.

####  Online

You can claim tax reliefs online using [ myAccount
](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) :

  * Click ‘Manage your tax’ under ‘PAYE services’ 
  * Click ‘Add new credits’ 
  * Select ‘Blind Person’s Tax Credit’ 

####  Application form

You can download an application form to [ claim the Blind Person’s Tax Credit
and Guide Dog Allowance (pdf) ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/documents/blind-tax-credit-claim-form.pdf) .

The form is available in other accessible formats by contacting the Revenue
Access Officer at [ accessofficer@revenue.ie
](mailto:accessofficer@revenue.ie) .

[ Find the contact details of the Revenue office
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-service-contact/paye-jobs-and-
pensions-helpline.aspx) to send your completed form to.

_**Page edited:** 31 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-reliefs-
for-people-with-a-visual-impairment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20reliefs%20for%20people%20with%20a%20vision%20impairment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-reliefs-
for-people-with-a-visual-impairment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-reliefs-for-
people-with-a-visual-impairment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20reliefs%20for%20people%20with%20a%20vision%20impairment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-reliefs-
for-people-with-a-visual-impairment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Mobility training for people with visual impairments_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/transport-and-disability/mobility-training-for-people-with-a-visual-impairment/)

If you have a visual impairment, orientation and mobility training can help
you develop a range of skills that will make it easier to move around safely.
Types of mobility aid and sources of training are described here.

2483.5972

  * [ _VAT refunds on aids and appliances used by people with disabilities_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/vat-refunds-on-aids-and-appliances-used-by-people-with-disabilities/)

People with disabilities may claim refunds of Value-Added Tax (VAT) on certain
aids and appliances.

2120.7358

  * [ _Tax credits and reliefs for people over 65_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

There are some tax reliefs specifically for people aged over 65. This page
also gives an overview of other tax reliefs that may be relevant.

1865.4572

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

