**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Asylum seekers and refugees ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/)
> [ The asylum process in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/) > Coming to Ireland from Ukraine

#  Coming to Ireland from Ukraine

  * Introduction 
  * Visas 
  * When you arrive in Ireland 
  * Social welfare 
  * Accommodation and housing 
  * Healthcare and medical cards 
  * Working in Ireland 
  * Money and tax 
  * Childcare 
  * Education 
  * Pets, driving and other issues 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

This page has information for people who have family in Ukraine, or for people
in Ukraine who plan to travel to Ireland or have recently arrived here.

You can also read about [ supports for Ukrainians in Ireland ](/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/supports-for-ukrainians-in-ireland/) and
[ social welfare supports for Ukrainian refugees ](/en/moving-
country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/social-welfare-supports-for-ukrainian-
refugees/) .

You can use [ Google Translate to read this page in Ukrainian ](https://www-
citizensinformation-
ie.translate.goog/en/moving_country/asylum_seekers_and_refugees/the_asylum_process_in_ireland/coming_to_ireland_from_ukraine.html?_x_tr_sl=en&_x_tr_tl=uk&_x_tr_hl=en&_x_tr_pto=wapp)
or another language (please note that this uses machine translation and may
not be a fully accurate translation of the page).

##  Visas

Ukrainian nationals [ must have a valid biometric passport
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/important-information-for-ukrainian-
nationals/) to travel to Ireland.

Citizens of Ukraine do not need a visa to travel to Ireland. If you are
travelling with family members who are not Ukrainian citizens, they may [ need
a visa to come to Ireland ](/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/visa-
requirements-for-entering-ireland/) .

You can read [ frequently asked questions
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/faqs-for-ukraine-nationals-and-residents-of-
ukraine/) from the Irish immigration authority, called Immigration Service
Delivery (ISD), for visa and immigration information.

##  When you arrive in Ireland

When you arrive in Ireland, you should speak to an immigration officer (at
Passport Control). You may be brought to Citywest Convention Centre in Dublin.
You can apply for temporary protection under the [ EU Temporary Protection
Directive ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-
in-ireland/temporary-protection-directive#leaf67) .

If you arrive in Rosslare Port, you can apply for temporary protection in the
reception facility in the Port.

If you have a Temporary Protection permission, it is automatically renewed
annually as long as the Temporary Protection Directive is in force. You do not
have to do anything. You can use the [ notice on the immigration service’s
website ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/travel-confirmation-notice/) as
proof that your permission to live in Ireland has been extended.

####  Temporary Protection Directive extended to March 2026

In June 2024, the European Council extended the Temporary Protection Directive
until March 2026. This will be updated on the immigration service’s website in
due course.

###  I have not received a temporary protection permission letter

If you have arrived into another port of entry to the State, you can get your
permission letter by visiting one of these centres:

  * Citywest Convention Centre, Saggart, Co. Dublin, D24 A38Y 
  * Cork City PSC and PPSN Centre, Ground Floor, Hanover Street, Cork, T12 PX62 
  * Limerick Intreo Centre, Dominick Street, Limerick, V94 X327 

If you cannot travel to a centre, you can email [
ukrainesupportmailbox@justice.ie ](mailto:ukrainesupportmailbox@justice.ie) to
try to make other arrangements to get your permission letter.

###  **Irish Resident Permit**

The Department of Justice has started to issue [ Irish Resident Permit (IRP)
cards to beneficiaries of the EU Temporary Protection Directive.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/registration-of-non-eea-nationals-in-
ireland/)

##  Social welfare

You can find out more about getting income support in our page on [ social
welfare supports for Ukrainian refugees ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-
refugees-in-ireland/social-welfare-supports-for-ukrainian-refugees/) .

If you are getting income support and plan to leave Ireland, you should tell
your local Intreo Centre or DSP branch office before you travel.

##  Accommodation and housing

There is a shortage of accommodation in Ireland. The type of place you will be
offered depends on what is available at that time. You may have to stay in a
community centre, sports ground or in tented accommodation for a period. In
some cases, you might not get anywhere to stay.

###  State-provided accommodation

####  From 14 March 2024

If you register for temporary protection and State-provided accommodation at
any time from 14 March 2024, you will be accommodated for a maximum of 90 days
in State-provided accommodation, called a [ Designated Accommodation Centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/54291-changes-to-accommodation-for-
people-fleeing-war-in-ukraine/) . You can read about the [ rules when staying
in State-provided accommodation
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/62512-accommodation/) .

If you are in State-provided accommodation, you get a [ weekly payment
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/894dd-beneficiary-of-temporary-protection-
weekly-payment/) of €38.80 for an adult and €29.80 for a child. If you have
any qualified children, you will also get a monthly [ Child Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/child-benefit/) payment.

If you are not in State-provided accommodation, you can apply for social
welfare payments in the same way as Irish citizens, as long as you meet the
eligibility conditions.

####  Before 14 March 2024

If you registered for temporary protection and State-provided accommodation
before 14 March 2024, you could get [ social welfare payments
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-a-social-welfare-
payment/) in the same way as Irish citizens, as long as you met the
eligibility conditions.

If you stay in accommodation where food is provided, you must pay a
contribution of €10 per day for adults, and €5 per day for each child. You do
not have to pay for your first 2 weeks. If you refuse to pay, you could be
asked to leave.

A short-term absence from your accommodation may be allowed in exceptional
circumstances only. Absence requests must be applied for in advance and are
decided on a case-by-case basis. You can read more about [ the absence from
accommodation protocol
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/absencepolicyen/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/en/publication/47fe6-accommodation-
recognition-payment/) .

####  **Changes from 9 September 2024**

From 9 September 2024, if you are living in a [ Designated Accommodation
Centre ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9957c-designated-accommodation-
centres-current-availability/) where meals and utilities are provided, and you
arrived in Ireland before 14 March 2024, you no longer qualify for certain
social assistance payments.

You get the same rate as people who arrived after 14 March 2024. You get a [
weekly payment ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/894dd-beneficiary-of-temporary-
protection-weekly-payment/) of €38.80 for an adult and €29.80 for a child,
subject to an income test.

Read more about upcoming changes to [ social welfare supports for Ukrainian
refugees ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/ukrainian-
refugees-in-ireland/social-welfare-supports-for-ukrainian-refugees/) .

###  How to apply for accommodation

If you have nowhere to stay, you should tell immigration officials when you
arrive in Ireland. They will refer you to the Government’s Ukraine Crisis
Temporary Accommodation Team (UCTAT).

If you need accommodation and you are already in Ireland, you can email [
ukrainetempaccom@equality.gov.ie ](mailto:ukrainetempaccom@equality.gov.ie) .
You may have to wait until accommodation is available.

Include the following information in your email:

  * The full name of anyone who needs accommodation 
  * Dates of birth 
  * Phone number 
  * Where you are now (the full address if you have one) 
  * When you need the accommodation (for example, from tonight) 
  * Medical conditions, disabilities, allergies and dietary requirements 

##  Healthcare and medical cards

Health services in Ireland are delivered by Ireland’s public healthcare
service - the [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/) .
You can get the same [ public healthcare services as people who live in
Ireland ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-services/) .

Everyone coming to Ireland under the Temporary Protection Directive can apply
for a medical card with a simplified application process. A medical card
allows you to visit a doctor for free, access other health services and get
medicines at a reduced price. Children aged 16 and over must apply for a
medical card separately.

When you first arrive in Ireland, you should apply for your medical card using
a special [ medical card application form (pdf)
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/healthcare-in-ireland/medical-card-form-
mc1-u-form-ukrainian.pdf) for people from Ukraine. Read [ information from the
HSE in Ukrainian and Russian ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/healthcare-in-
ireland/english/ukrainian-nationals.html) . You can email your completed form
to [ PCRS.Applications@HSE.ie ](mailto:PCRS.Applications@HSE.ie) or by post to
the address on the form.

You need:

  * Your name, current address and date of birth. 
  * Your Personal Public Service (PPS) number [ (see above) ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine#ladfa1) . 
  * Your doctor’s (GP’s) address, stamp and signature. 

You can get information about health care services in Ireland from the [ HSE
website ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/healthcare-in-ireland/ukrainian-
refugees.html) . You can also read about the [ Irish health system in
Ukrainian ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/healthcare-in-ireland/ukraine-
nationals-uk.html) and in [ Russian ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/healthcare-
in-ireland/ukraine-nationals-ru.html) .

####  Vaccinations in Ireland

[ Vaccinations
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health_services/vaccinations/)
help to protect you and your children against preventable infectious diseases.
Many vaccinations are free in Ireland. You can [ read information about the
vaccines available
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/hcpinfo/ukraine/) from the HSE
for you and your [ children
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/ukraine/informationforparents.html)
in Ukrainian, Russian and English.

##  Working in Ireland

You have the right to work in Ireland when you have your Temporary Protection
permission letter. You can also work for yourself (self-employment) and you
can access vocational training in Ireland.

###  Help finding work

Anyone on Jobseeker's Allowance must be available for and looking for full-
time work. You can work part-time but you should keep looking for full-time
work.

You can get help finding work from the [ Intreo employment services
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/fb84c0-intreo/) .

You can:

  * Talk to an Employment Support Officer at your [ local Intreo centre or branch office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/)
  * Go to an employment support event being organised near you for Ukrainians. You should get an invite, but you can attend without one. 
  * Find vacancies and apply for jobs using the online jobs website [ www.jobsireland.ie ](https://jobsireland.ie/) – information is available in Ukrainian and Russian 

###  Your income support when you start working

Check how working part time could affect your income support payment using the
[ on-line calculator ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/out-of-work-
payments/benefit-of-work-estimator) .

When you start working part time or full time you must contact your local
Intreo Office to tell them that your circumstances have changed.

The Department of Social Protection has more information on [ working in
Ireland in Ukrainian and Russian
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/c3dd2-working-in-ireland-ukraine-
letter/#letter-in-english) .

###  Your employment rights

Read more about your [ employment rights when coming to Ireland from Ukraine
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/news-
media/workplace_relations_notices/employment-rights-in-ireland-information-
for-ukrainian-nationals.htmlhttps://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/news-
media/workplace_relations_notices/employment-rights-in-ireland-information-
for-ukrainian-nationals.html) . The Workplace Relations Commission (WRC) has
information on employment law in [ Ukrainian (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/ukranian-
language-employment-law-explained.pdf) and [ Russian (pdf)
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/publications_forms/other_language_publications/russian_language_-
_employment_law_explained.pdf) .

###  Professions

You must register and have your [ qualifications recognised ](/en/returning-
to-ireland/starting-work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-
ireland/) to work in some professions. For example, you must register with the
Medical Council to work as a doctor.

The Teaching Council has a process to allow teachers who qualified in Ukraine
to [ register and teach in Ireland
](https://www.teachingcouncil.ie/register/qualified-outside-of-
ireland/registration-process-for-qualified-ukrainian-teachers/) .

##  Money and tax

To open a bank account you need identification. There is a [ guide in
Ukrainian about opening a bank account if you do not have the standard
identification (pdf) ](https://bpfi.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/BPFI-Guide-
to-Opening-Bank-Accounts-in-Ireland-for-Protection-Applicants_LR-
Ukrainian.pdf) .

Revenue has [ information about the taxes you pay
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/life-events-and-personal-circumstances/moving-to-
or-from-ireland/advice-ukrainian-nationals-starting-job-ireland.aspx) as a
worker in Ukrainian and Russian.

If you have come to Ireland because of the war but you continue to work
remotely for your Ukrainian employer, you do not have to pay Irish income tax
on income you get from the employer in 2022, 2023 or 2024. [ Read more about
tax and working remotely for your Ukrainian employer
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/ebrief/2024/no-0982024.aspx) .

##  Childcare

The [ Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) ](/en/education/pre-school-
education-and-childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-scheme/) programme
is a free preschool programme for all eligible children before starting
primary school. Your child must be between 2 years and 8 months in the
September that the ECCE term starts. They cannot be older than 5 years and 6
months by the end of the ECCE term in June. ECCE is normally provided for 3
hours a day, 5 days a week over the school year.

The [ National Childcare Scheme ](/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/) has 2 types of subsidy for children who
are aged over 6 months:

  * A universal subsidy for children under 15. It is not means tested. 
  * An income-assessed subsidy for children up to 15. It is means tested. 

Parents can find [ information on childcare
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/35845-first5-ukraine-response-and-
supports/) including [ supports for children with disabilities
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/270109/ed36b730-0ba9-4f58-851e-01bd7bdec579.pdf#page=null)
to access childhood care and [ a guide to childcare in Ireland
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/270116/342042c8-0702-4409-8b25-885309bc223c.pdf#page=null)
.

##  Education

###  How can I enrol my child in school?

You can contact [ your local school
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/495b8a-schools/) or the [ Regional
Education and Language Teams (REALT)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/48639-information-for-schools-
ukraine/#regional-education-and-language-teams-realt) to help you enrol your
child in school.

The [ Tusla Education Support Service ](https://www.tusla.ie/tess/get-in-
touch/#EWO) can also help you find a school for your child.

You can read about how to enrol your child in:

  * [ Primary school ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/choosing-a-primary-school/)
  * [ Secondary school ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-school/)

Parents with a [ child starting primary school ](https://www.into.ie/media-
centre/publications/other-publications/) can find information in Ukrainian and
Russian. You can find information in Ukrainian and Russian on [ early
childcare, primary school and Transition Year in secondary school
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/48639-information-for-schools-
ukraine/#information-for-parents-of-children-aged-2-5-years-on-the-early-
childhood-care-and-education-ecce-and-primary-school-systems-in-ireland) .

###  School transport

[ School transport services
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/320e9-employment-and-education/#education)
are available to Ukrainian students on the same basis as children in Ireland.
There will be no charge for the service if seats are available.

If you are:

  * **Living with a host family, in your own accommodation or in private accommodation** , you can [ apply online ](https://public.flowforma.com/?token=OfHd8bEHNUjypR1J2ohyawPtOLA8xbJSVD02MsoVP7sPa83cAd) . You can get the form in English, Ukrainian and Russian 
  * **Living in an accommodation centre** , the school principal of your child’s school should apply for school transport and [ return the form ](https://assets.gov.ie/221036/4a4b51f0-937d-4e11-b4a9-e31e40e84790.xlsx) to REALT. 

If you move to new accommodation a new application will be required.

Contact [ Transportapplications@education.gov.ie
](mailto:Transportapplications@education.gov.ie) or call 057 932 5467 for more
information about school transport.

###  Further and higher education

**College and university applications**

You can apply for a place at a Higher Education Institute (HEI) through the [
Central Applications Office (CAO) ](/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
. You will need to confirm if your application is based on your [ Leaving
Certificate ](/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/) results.
Otherwise, your application will be based on your academic records such as
English competency certificate or Ukrainian school tests that you will present
to individual HEIs.

**Financial supports**

If you want to attend a college or university and you don’t qualify for a [
student grant ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-
third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) or the Free Fees Scheme, you may
get the [ Temporary Tuition Fee Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/b95e5-ukraine-student-fees-and-financial-
support-update/#temporary-tuition-fee-support) and a financial stipend. You
can find more information on [ gov.ie/ukraine ](http://gov.ie/ukraine) .

The [ Irish Universities Association ](https://www.iua.ie/press-
releases/ukraine/guidance-for-displaced-ukrainian-students-for-
sept-2023-entry-and-beyond/) has guidance on supports for undergraduate and
postgraduate Ukrainian students.

**Further education**

You can apply for Further Education and Training courses provided by Education
Training Boards across Ireland. Courses are free or have a low charge. You can
find course options on the FETCH [ website ](http://%20website/) .

**PLC Bursary**

If you want to attend a [ PLC course ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) , you can apply for the [ PLC
Bursary for Displaced Persons (Ukraine) Scheme 2023-2024
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ece1d-plc-bursary-for-displaced-persons-
ukraine-scheme-2023-your-questions-answered/) .

The Bursary is open to students starting year one of an approved PLC course or
progressing into the second year of an approved 2-year course.

###  Qualifications from Ukraine

Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI) has information (in Ukrainian) about
its [ qualifications recognition service
](https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2022-03/naric-guide-ukraine.pdf) .
This guide helps you to use QQI’s [ foreign qualifications recognition service
](https://www.qqi.ie/news/qqi-supports-for-displaced-ukraine-nationals)
(NARIC).

##  Pets, driving and other issues

###  Can I bring my pet to Ireland?

From 21 November 2022, if you [ bring pets from Ukraine ](/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/bringing-pets-to-ireland/)
to Ireland, you must comply with all the requirements for pets entering
Ireland from outside the EU/EEA.

If your pet is not fully complaint, it will be put in quarantine. You must pay
for the quarantine at a rate of €15 per night and a further €25 transportation
fee.

###  Can I drive in Ireland?

You can drive on your Ukrainian driving licence while in Ireland under
temporary protection. You can no longer exchange your Ukrainian licence for an
Irish driving licence.

If you have already exchanged your Ukrainian driving licence for an Irish
licence, you can continue to drive on your Irish licence for one year from the
date it was issued.

If you have already exchanged your Ukrainian driving licence and you want it
returned to you, send your Irish licence to National Driver Licence Service,
PO Box 858, Southside Delivery Office, Cork. You must include a letter in
English saying you want your Ukrainian licence returned. You must also include
your Irish address and phone number.

You can read more in the [ frequently asked questions for Ukrainian road users
(pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/services/faqs-for-driving-a-
car-in-ireland---english-april-2023.pdf?sfvrsn=444d2a77_0) on the Road Safety
Authority’s website. You can also send an email in English to [
Ukrainelicence@ndls.ie ](mailto:cis@welfare.ie) for further information.

####  Bringing your car from Ukraine

If you bring your car from Ukraine, there are certain vehicle importation
rules you must follow, depending on how long you stay in Ireland. You can
apply for a vehicle temporary exemption when you arrive. This means you do not
have to pay vehicle tax. You can [ contact Revenue for more information
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/Home.aspx) .

####  Car insurance

By law you must be insured to drive your Ukrainian car when using it on Irish
roads. The Motor (Transport) Insurance Bureau of Ukraine (UA) has prepared a
list of Ukrainian Insurance Providers that allows Ukrainian refugees to renew
their insurance policies online and to get an International Insurance Green
Card. You can find more information about this at [ www.mibi.ie
](https://www.mibi.ie/circulation-of-ukraine-registered-vehicles-in-roi/)

##  Further information

You can read about:

  * [ Supports for Ukrainians in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/supports-for-ukrainians-in-ireland/)
  * [ The Temporary Protection Directive ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/temporary-protection-directive/)
  * [ Social welfare supports for Ukrainian refugees ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/social-welfare-supports-for-ukrainian-refugees/)

The following organisations have further information in English, Ukrainian and
Russian:

  * [ Immigration Service Delivery ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/faqs-for-ukraine-nationals-and-residents-of-ukraine/) \- Frequently Asked Questions for Ukrainian nationals and residents of Ukraine 
  * [ The Irish Refugee Council ](https://www.irishrefugeecouncil.ie/ukraine-information-note) \- Ukraine information note 
  * [ The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ](https://help.unhcr.org/ireland/ukraine-situation/) \- Travel to and arrival in Ireland 

The European Commission has a freephone helpline in Ukrainian that can give
you information on EU entry and travel, your right to education and access to
jobs or healthcare.

  * Freephone 00 800 6789 1011 from within the EU 
  * Phone +32 22 99 96 96 from outside the EU (charges apply) 

The [ helpline also provides information in official EU languages and Russian
and offers a free call back service ](https://european-
union.europa.eu/contact-eu_en) . You can also contact the European Commission
for information [ through an online contact form ](https://european-
union.europa.eu/contact-eu/write-us_en) .

_**Page edited:** 15 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-
ireland-from-ukraine/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Coming%20to%20Ireland%20from%20Ukraine&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-
ireland-from-ukraine/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-
ireland-from-ukraine/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Coming%20to%20Ireland%20from%20Ukraine&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-
ireland-from-ukraine/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Coming from the EU/EEA to work_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-from-eu-to-work/)

Details the rights of EU/EEA nationals to come to Ireland to work, and covers
rights while working.

1433.8229

  * [ _Coming to work in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-work-in-ireland/)

The rights of EU nationals and non-EU nationals to work in Ireland and
includes information on how to apply for an employment permit.

1408.4004

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

1346.056

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

