**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Asylum seekers and refugees ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/)
> [ The asylum process in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/) > EU Dublin Regulation

#  EU Dublin Regulation

  * Introduction 
  * Examination of your application under the Dublin Regulation 
  * Transfer decisions 
  * Transfers to other Dublin countries 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The EU Dublin Regulation is an EU law on the rules about which country should
assess your application for international protection. It applies to _Dublin
countries_ , which include all the countries in the EU, plus Iceland,
Switzerland, Norway and Liechtenstein.

The Dublin Regulation is also called Dublin III because it was the third
version of an agreement that was originally signed in 1990.

When you [ apply for international protection ](/en/moving-country/asylum-
seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/applying-for-refugee-
status-in-ireland/) , you are asked about your history as part of your
application. If you have applied for international protection in another
Dublin country, or if the International Protection Office (IPO) decides that
another country should be responsible for your international protection
application, you could be transferred to that country.

##  Examination of your application under the Dublin Regulation

When you apply for international protection, the International Protection
Office (IPO) takes your photograph and your fingerprints. The IPO checks this
information against data held by [ Eurodac ](/en/moving-country/asylum-
seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/eurodac-system/) . Eurodac
is an EU database that stores the fingerprints of international protection
applicants, or people who have crossed a border illegally.

###  Dublin procedure

If the IPO have reason to believe that another country should be responsible
for your application for international protection, it will use the Dublin
procedures to determine which country is responsible.

The IPO does not [ examine the details of your application ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/how-refugee-
applications-commissioner-deals-with-applications/) for international
protection until it has made a decision in the Dublin procedure. It will ask
you for the information it needs to make its decision. This could mean you
must attend an interview, or you could give them the information they need in
writing. Your [ solicitor ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/services-for-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/legal-aid-for-asylum-seekers-
in-ireland/) can help you.

###  Reasons another Dublin country is responsible

The reasons why another country could be responsible for your international
protection application are (in order of importance):

  * Your husband or wife, or your dependent children have international protection, or are asylum seekers in another Dublin country 
  * You have (or previously had) a visa or residence permit in another Dublin country 
  * Your fingerprints were taken in another Dublin country 
  * There is evidence that you were in another Dublin country, even if your fingerprints were not taken 

###  Other family members

If you have other family members that depend on you (or you depend on them) in
another Dublin country, that country could accept the responsibility of
assessing your international protection application. This applies to your
mother, father, child, brother or sister. Your family members must be living
there legally, depend on you (or you depend on them), and either you or them
are:

  * Pregnant or have a newborn baby or 
  * Seriously ill, disabled or elderly 

##  Transfer decisions

The IPO will send you a transfer decision when it has finished examining your
case under the Dublin Regulations. If the IPO decides that your international
protection application should be transferred to another Dublin country, the
IPO will:

  * Refuse your application for international protection 
  * Contact the other Dublin country and request that they either take charge of your application or take you back to that country 

###  Appeals

You can [ appeal a transfer decision ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/if-your-application-for-refugee-status-
is-refused/) to the International Protection Appeals Tribunal (IPAT). Your
appeal must be received within 10 days of the transfer decision.

###  Requests to take charge

Ireland can ask another Dublin country to take charge of your international
protection application if you have not made an international protection
application in that country. Ireland must request this within 3 months of your
application for international protection in Ireland. If the request is not
made within 3 months, then Ireland must take responsibility for your
application.

The other Dublin country must accept or refuse the request within 2 months of
the request. If it does not respond within 2 months, then it is treated as if
they have accepted responsibility for your international protection
application.

###  Requests to take back

Ireland can ask another Dublin country to take back your application if you
made an application for international protection in that country. Ireland must
send this request within 2 months of your Irish application. The other Dublin
country must respond within one month, or within 2 weeks if the request was
based on information from Eurodac.

Ireland can make an urgent request in some situations. For example, if you
were refused [ permission to enter Ireland ](/en/moving-country/visas-for-
ireland/permission-to-land-in-ireland/) or you are held in detention. Urgent
requests should be answered within one month.

##  Transfers to other Dublin countries

Following a transfer decision, the [ Repatriation Unit
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-
ireland/spouse-civil-partner-of-irish-national-scheme/repatriation-division/)
of the Department of Justice will contact you with details of how your
transfer will take place.

If you appeal the transfer decision, you can stay in Ireland while you are
waiting for a decision on the appeal.

##  Further information

You can read an EU leaflet:

  * On the [ EU Dublin Regulation ](http://www.orac.ie/website/orac/oracwebsite.nsf/page/AJNR-9RDERM105281-en/$File/EU Dublin III Regulation leaflet for all asylum applicants.pdf)
  * For [ people who are in the Dublin Procedure ](http://www.orac.ie/website/orac/oracwebsite.nsf/page/AJNR-9RDEU4105681-en/$File/EU Dublin III Regulation leaflet for applicants in the Dublin procedure.pdf)
  * For [ children seeking international protection ](http://www.orac.ie/website/orac/oracwebsite.nsf/page/AJNR-9RDEUW1057251-en/$File/EU Dublin III Regulation leaflet for children seeking international protection.pdf)

###  International Protection Office

Immigration Service Delivery

78-83 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin  
D02 ND99  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Mon-Fri, 9.00 - 14.30

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ipo.gov.ie/ ](http://www.ipo.gov.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@ipo.gov.ie ](mailto:info@ipo.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 7 October 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/dublin-
convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=EU%20Dublin%20Regulation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/dublin-
convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/dublin-
convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=EU%20Dublin%20Regulation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/dublin-
convention/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Permission to remain following an application for international protection_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/permission-to-remain/)

People who do not meet the requirements of refugee status or subsidiary
protection may be granted permission to remain in Ireland.

1134.803

  * [ _International protection and the powers of the Minister for Justice_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/minister-for-justice/)

This document describes the role of the Minister for Justice in the granting
of international protection, and describes some of the powers that the
Minister has.

1042.438

  * [ _How your international protection application is assessed_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/how-refugee-applications-commissioner-deals-with-applications/)

An outline of how applications for international protection in Ireland are
assessed and examined.

1037.9143

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

