**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Pensions
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/) > Taxation of pensions

#  Taxation of pensions

  * Introduction 
  * Occupational pensions 
  * Social welfare pensions 
  * Income from abroad 
  * Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) 
  * Universal Social Charge (USC) 

##  Introduction

This page explains how income you get from pensions is taxed.

When you retire you may also get part of your pension as a lump sum. If you
do, there is [ tax relief on lump sums at retirement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/#lab220) .

##  Occupational pensions

[ Occupational pensions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/occupational-pensions/) are taxable. They are subject to tax
under the PAYE (Pay As You Earn) system, so the process is the same as when
you were being paid your salary. If you have both an occupational pension and
a  social welfare pension  , you may have to pay tax on both. Read more about
[ taxation of social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-
payments/) .

Occupational pensions are not subject to [ social insurance contributions
(PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/social-insurance/) but, if you are aged under 70, you may have to pay
PRSI on other income. Occupational pensions are subject to the [ Universal
Social Charge (USC) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-
charge/) .

Many pensioners do not have to pay tax because the amount of their income is
below the level that is taxable. There are additional tax credits for people
aged over 65 and income exemption limits below which no tax is payable – read
more about [ tax reliefs for people aged over 65 ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)
.

###  Exempted pensions

Income from the following sources is exempt from tax:

  * Foreign occupational and social security pensions that would not be taxable if the recipient lived in the country that granted them 
  * Magdalene Laundry payments 
  * Wound and disability pensions and related gratuities under the Army Pensions Acts (any part that is not due to disability is taxable) 
  * Military gratuities and demobilisation pay given to officers of the National Forces or the Defence Forces of Ireland 

##  Social welfare pensions

Social welfare pensions paid by the Department of Social Protection are liable
to income tax. They are not liable to USC or PRSI.

Income tax is not deducted from your social welfare pension when it is paid to
you. How you pay the tax depends on whether you are self-employed or a PAYE
taxpayer.

####  PAYE

If you have income from employment or an occupational pension, you are taxed
under the PAYE system.

If you are a PAYE taxpayer, your tax credits and tax rate band are reduced to
take account of the tax that is due on your social welfare pension. This means
that the amount of tax due on your social welfare pension is deducted from
your other income.

The technical term for this is _coding in_ of credits. If your social welfare
pension is not coded in, you have to pay tax as a self-employed person in a
lump sum by 31 October each year.

**Self-employed**

If you are self-employed, you include your social welfare payments on [ your
income tax return ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-
employed-people/) (Form 11) and pay any tax due with your annual income tax
payment.

####  Other non-PAYE

If your non-pension income is not taxed on the PAYE system, for example if you
have an occupational pension from abroad or you have investment income, then
you [ make a tax return as a self-employed person ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-people/) .

##  Income from abroad

Income you get from abroad is generally taxable in Ireland if you are resident
in Ireland.

If you are living abroad and you receive your pension from Ireland, it may or
may not be taxable under PAYE. If there is a Double Taxation Agreement, you
may be exempted from Irish tax (but usually will be liable in the other
country). If you are exempt from Irish tax, [ Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie/) may tell your pension provider (for example, your
former employer or the pension fund) not to deduct income tax under PAYE. If
Revenue do not do this, then PAYE is deducted in the usual way.

If you are getting a foreign pension that would be exempt from tax if you were
resident in the country paying it, you may also be exempt from paying tax on
it in Ireland.

###  Double Taxation Agreements

Double Taxation Agreements generally make a distinction between pensions paid
by governments to former employees and pensions that are paid by private
employers. However, not all agreements make this distinction and they also
vary in other ways so you will need to check the agreement to see how it may
affect you.

Most Double Taxation Agreements provide that pensions for non-governmental
employees are taxed in the country of residence. So, if you are living in
Ireland and getting an occupational pension from another country, you should
generally pay Irish tax on it.

The opposite is the case for pensions for former government employees –
generally they are taxable only in the country where they are paid. So, if you
are a former employee of the government of the United States of America and
are now living in Ireland, you pay tax on your occupational pension only in
the USA.

Read more about [ Double Taxation Agreements.
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/life-events-and-personal-circumstances/moving-to-
or-from-ireland/moving-or-returning-to-ireland/double-taxation-agreement.aspx)

##  Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI)

You pay PRSI on your income from employment or self-employment. You do not pay
PRSI on your occupational or social welfare pension.

You are not liable to pay PRSI if you:

  * Are aged over 70 
  * Were aged over 66 by 1 January 2024 
  * Were getting a State Pension (Contributory) by 1 January 2024 

Find out more about [ social insurance in Ireland ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) .

##  Universal Social Charge (USC)

All social welfare payments, including social welfare pensions, are exempt
from USC.

However, occupational pensions are subject to USC. The rate you pay varies
depending on your age and on whether you hold a full medical card. See the
page on the [ Universal Social Charge ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax/universal-social-charge/) for more information.

_**Page edited:** 21 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/taxation-of-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Taxation%20of%20pensions&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/taxation-of-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/pensions/taxation-of-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Taxation%20of%20pensions&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/taxation-of-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)

There are 3 different ways to legally marry in Ireland.

1082.6636

  * [ _Examples of how social welfare payments are taxed_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-taxed/)

See examples of how social welfare payments are taxed, such as Maternity
Benefit, Jobseeker’s Benefit, and Illness Benefit.

1081.3262

  * [ _Introduction to pensions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/introduction-to-pensions/)

Find out about the different types of pensions.

1035.4304

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

