**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Debt ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/) > Money Advice and Budgeting Service

#  Money Advice and Budgeting Service

  * Introduction 
  * MABS tools to help you with your money 
  * How MABS can help you 
  * Mortgage arrears 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) ](http://www.mabs.ie/)
provides a free and confidential service if you are having problems managing
your money or problems with debt.

MABS money advisers can give advice and practical help to review your debts,
deal with your creditors and work out solutions.

MABS has a dedicated service to help with mortgage arrears. MABS is also
involved in the [ Abhaile ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/abhaile-mortgage-arrears-support/) scheme for people in serious
mortgage arrears.

MABS provides [ money management education ](https://www.mabs.ie/en/about/how-
we-help/partnership-work-in-education/) and produces a range of [ publications
](https://www.mabs.ie/en/about/publications/) . It also has [ money tools
](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/) you can use to help manage your money and
tackle any debts.

##  MABS tools to help you with your money

MABS provides [ Money Tools ](http://www.mabs.ie/money-tools/) that can help
you:

  * Manage your money 
  * Find out if you are in difficulty and where to get help 
  * Make a plan to deal with debts 

You can use the [ My Budget tool ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-budget/) to
help you work out a budget plan. It shows how much money you have coming in
and going out over a year, and how much is left over or by how much you are
short. MABS has [ advice on managing your money ](https://mabs.ie/managing-
money/) to make it go further.

If you are not sure whether you are in financial difficulty yet, you can use [
My Financial Healthcheck ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-financial-
healthcheck/) to find the information, advice and support you need.

If you want to work out a plan to deal with debts you can use the MABS tool [
My Full Financial Picture ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/full-financial-
picture/) . It shows how much money you have coming in and going out and also
includes space to record bills, credit, assets and debts so that you have a
total debt figure.

The information you gather will help you to follow [ the steps you can take to
deal with your debt ](https://mabs.ie/tackling-debt/five-steps/) .

##  How MABS can help you

MABS provides a confidential service and will not discuss your situation with
anyone without your signed agreement. MABS will give you information and
support you in making decisions, but will not tell you what to do about your
debts and payments. You are the person who decides.

If you  contact the MABS Helpline  an adviser will talk to you about your
money concerns and give you some advice. They can send you information and
materials to help you with your money problems. You may be able to deal with
the issues yourself at this stage, or you can make an appointment to see a
money adviser in a MABS office.

When you contact MABS, it is important to tell them about anything very
urgent, for example, if you are being taken to court or your electricity is to
be disconnected. In cases like these, you may be able to get an emergency
appointment.

To be able to help you, the MABS adviser will need as much information as
possible about your financial situation. You will need to collect any bills,
statements, account books, payslips, or social welfare receipts that you have,
as well as any letters that your creditors have sent, even if you have not
opened them.

The adviser will:

  * Look at all your income and ensure that you are getting any payments or benefits you are entitled to 
  * Check through all your debts 
  * Help you to work out how much you need to cover your everyday needs 
  * Give you advice on budgeting 
  * Draw up a financial statement to use when dealing with your creditors 
  * Help you to decide which of your debts to pay first 
  * Help you to work out a payment plan – how much you can afford to pay each week off each debt 
  * Negotiate with your creditors on your behalf, if you want 
  * Provide support while you deal with your debts 
  * Refer you to other services and contact them on your behalf, if you want 
  * Help to arrange to pay regular amount off your debts, as agreed with your creditors 
  * Refer you to someone who can help with a [ personal insolvency option ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/) if appropriate 

###  MABS agreement with lenders

MABS has an agreement with the Banking and Payments Federation of Ireland
(BPFI) to help people to manage their debt repayments. The lenders involved
have agreed to work with MABS to help customers find a solution and agree a
manageable repayment plan.

The agreement is called the [ BPFI-MABS Operational Protocol (pdf)
](https://www.mabs.ie/59/BPFI_MABS_Operational_Protocol_2015.pdf) . It sets
out the process followed by lenders and MABS when you seek help from MABS.

The protocol allows for the write-off of some debt, at the lender’s
discretion. It does not apply to mortgage debt.

MABS can also help you to agree a sustainable repayment plan with other
creditors (who are not part of the protocol.

###  If you cannot pay your debts

MABS can advise you on the options available if you cannot pay your debts.
There are [ 3 personal insolvency options ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/) .

Most MABS services are registered as Approved Intermediaries with the [
Insolvency Service of Ireland (ISI) ](https://www.isi.gov.ie/) . This means
they can assess whether you should apply for a [ Debt Relief Notice
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-
notices/) and can bring you through the application process.

##  Mortgage arrears

[ If you are having difficulty paying your mortgage ](/en/housing/owning-a-
home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-debt/) , MABS can advise you on
your options.

MABS provides [ information on dealing with mortgage debt
](https://mabs.ie/mortgage-arrears/) .

MABS has [ Dedicated Mortgage Arrears (DMA) advisers
](https://www.mabs.ie/en/abhaile/financial-supports-and-advice/) to give
independent expert advice. DMA advisers can help you find out what type of
financial, insolvency or legal services you need and help you to access them.

MABS is also involved in providing free mortgage arrears support as part of
the [ Abhaile ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-mortgage-
arrears-support/) scheme. Abhaile offers [ financial and legal support and
advice ](https://mabs.ie/abhaile/about-abhaile/) .

###  Code of conduct on mortgage arrears

The Central Bank has a [ Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/) which sets out what your
lender must do. Mortgage lenders must follow a process called the [ Mortgage
Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/mortgage-arrears-resolution-process/) . The lender must refer you to
sources of information and advice, such as MABS.

As part of the MARP, you must fill out a [ standard financial statement (pdf)
](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/Regulation/consumer-
protection/other-codes-of-conduct/36-gns-4-2-7-financial-statement.pdf) for
your lender, so that they can assess your financial position and work out the
best solution. MABS can help you to complete this statement. The Central Bank
has published [ A Consumer Guide to Completing a Standard Financial Statement
(pdf) ](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/Regulation/consumer-
protection/other-codes-of-conduct/35-gns-4-2-7-mortgage-arrears---
sfs.pdf?sfvrsn=4) .

##  Where to apply

Use the MABS tool [ My Financial Healthcheck ](https://mabs.ie/money-tools/my-
financial-healthcheck/) as a starting point for information, advice and
support.

Ring the MABS Helpline on 0818 07 2000 (9am–8pm, Monday–Friday) or email [
helpline@mabs.ie ](mailto:helpline@mabs.ie) .

You can also [ request a call back ](https://mabs.ie/contact/call-back/) .

Contact [ your local MABS office ](https://mabs.ie/contact/) for an
appointment to meet a money adviser.

_**Page edited:** 25 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/mabs-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Money%20Advice%20and%20Budgeting%20Service&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/mabs-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/mabs-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Money%20Advice%20and%20Budgeting%20Service&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/mabs-service/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Regulation of residential services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/regulation-residential-care-people-with-disabilities/)

Residential services for people with disabilities must meet certain standards.
The Health Information and Quality Authority (HIQA) registers and inspects
these services.

1232.1517

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

1220.7721

  * [ _Health services for people with disabilities_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/health-services-for-people-with-intellectual-physical-or-sensory-disabilities/)

A general introduction to the services provided by the Health Service
Executive (HSE) for people with disabilities.

1189.5747

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

