**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Coming to work in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/) > [
Finding work or starting a business ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/) > Migrant workers and unemployment

#  Migrant workers and unemployment

  * Unemployed in Ireland 
  * Social welfare payments 
  * Tax refunds 
  * Return home 
  * Further information 

##  Unemployed in Ireland

If you have come to [ work in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-work-in-ireland/) and you lose your job, you
need to find out if you have a right to redundancy, stay and look for work,
social welfare and tax refunds.

If you are a UK citizen, you have the right to live and work in Ireland. You
can read more about the [ residence rights of UK citizens
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-
uk/residence-rules-UK-citizens/) .

If you are an EEA or Swiss national you can stay in Ireland, if you are
unemployed and [ looking for work
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-welfare/) . If you are getting
unemployment benefit in the country you are leaving, you may transfer it to
Ireland for a limited time. Find more information about [ unemployment
benefits in the EU ](https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/work/unemployment-
and-benefits/unemployment/index_en.htm) .

If you are a non-EEA national who has an employment permit there are special
arrangements if you lose your job – see below.

###  Employment permit holders

There are special rules for [ employment permit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/overview-employment-permits/) holders [ who have
been made redundant ](https://dbei.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-
Skills/Employment-Permits/Redundancy/) . You must notify the Employment
Permits Section of the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment within 4
weeks of the redundancy using the [ Redundancy Notification Form
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/Publications/Notification-of-dismissal-by-
reason-of-redundancy-under-Sections-20A-20B-of-the-Employment-Permits-
Act-2006-as-amended-.html) . You have up to 6 months from the date on which
you were made redundant to find another job.

If you have been made redundant after working on a work permit for 5
consecutive years [ you will no longer need a permit to work in Ireland.
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-
ireland/long-term-residency/)

If you entered the State on a valid employment permit but you fell out of the
system through no fault of your own, or you have been badly treated or
exploited in the workplace, you may be eligible for a [ Reactivation
Employment Permit. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/reactivation-employment-permit/)

###  Redundancy

If you are dismissed by your employer you should check if it is a [ redundancy
situation, ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/redundancy/what-is-redundancy/) for example, the closure of a
business. Your employer must prove that there was a genuine redundancy
situation and that [ fair procedures were followed.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/fair-grounds-for-dismissal/) If it is not a genuine
redundancy or if you think you have been unfairly selected for redundancy, you
may qualify to bring a claim for [ unfair dismissal.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/dismissal/unfair-dismissal/)

If it is a genuine redundancy situation and you have been working for your
employer for at least 2 years, you may be entitled to a [ redundancy payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/redundancy/redundancy-payments/) .

You may have [ other entitlements such as notice and holiday pay
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/losing-your-job/losing-job-entitlements/) .

##  Social welfare payments

###  **Jobseeker's Benefit**

You may be entitled to [ Jobseeker’s Benefit(JB)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) when you lose your job or are
made redundant. To get JB you must be unemployed, looking for work and have
paid a certain number of social insurance (PRSI) contributions.

**EEA migrant workers** may [ combine their social insurance contributions
paid in another EU country ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-
insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) to help them qualify for JB.

EEA workers who do not qualify for Jobseeker's Benefit and are actively
looking for work will meet the habitual residence requirement for [
Supplementary Welfare Allowance (SWA) ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) . If you been working in Ireland
for less than 12 months, you can get SWA for 6 months from the date your
employment ended. If you have been employed for more than 12-months, you can
get SWA as long as you are actively looking for work. SWA is a means-tested
payment.

You can read about [ EU/EEA citizens and social welfare
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/eu-citizens-and-social-welfare/) .

**Non-EEA migrant workers** who qualify for JB can get it if they are legally
resident in Ireland.

**Non-EEA students** are not entitled to social welfare payments in Ireland.

###  **Jobseeker's Allowance**

If you are not entitled to Jobseeker’s Benefit, you can apply for [
Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) .
Jobseeker’s Allowance is a means-tested payment. To get JA you must be
unemployed, looking for work and pass a means test. You must also be [
habitually resident ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) to get JA.

##  Tax refunds

You may be entitled to a [ tax refund ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-
refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/) , if you have paid tax and you
are now unemployed. If you have not paid any tax, you will not be due a
refund.

If you are getting another income which is taxable, for example, Jobseeker’s
Benefit, you should wait for 8 weeks from the date you became unemployed
before applying for a refund.

If you are not getting Jobseeker’s Benefit and have no other taxable income,
you should wait 4 weeks from the date you become unemployed before applying
for a refund.

If emergency tax was being deducted by your former employer you should apply
immediately.

##  Return home

If you have no work and you are not entitled to a social welfare payment or
you do not have [ permission to remain
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-
permission/information-on-registering/immigration-permission-
stamps/#:~:text=If%20you%20are%20coming%20to,or%20join%20family%20in%20Ireland.)
, you may find it very difficult to continue living in Ireland.

If you are an EEA citizen, you can contact your local [ Community Welfare
Service ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/community-welfare-
services-and-payments/) to find out if they can help you return home.

**Scheme of voluntary assisted return**

If you are a non-EEA citizens, an asylum seeker or an irregular migrant who
wishes to return voluntarily to your country of origin the [ International
Organisation for Migration (IOM) may be able to help you to return home
](https://eea.iom.int/ireland) . If you return voluntarily and you have no
outstanding criminal court proceedings, you may apply to re-enter Ireland
legally for the purpose of work or study in the future.

There are a number of organisations providing [ supports for non-EEA nationals
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/support-services-for-foreign-nationals/) in
Ireland, such as:

  * The [ Immigrant Council of Ireland (ICI) ](http://immigrantcouncil.ie/) supports migrants coming to Ireland for purposes such as work, study, family reunification, self-employment or to visit. ICI provides an information service and a limited legal service to immigrants. 
  * The [ Migrant Rights Centre (MRC) ](https://www.mrci.ie/) supports migrant workers and their families. The MRC operates a drop-in centre which provides information, advice and assistance. 

##  Further information

###  Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment

Employment Permits Section

Earlsfort Centre  
Lower Hatch Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 PW01  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Helpline only: Monday to Friday 9:30am - 5pm

**Tel:** +353 1 417 5333

**Locall:** 0818 808 090

**Fax:** +353 1 631 3268

**Homepage:** [ https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-
Skills/Employment-Permits/ ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-
Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/)

**Contact Form:** [ https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/what-we-do/workplace-and-
skills/employment-permits/employment-permit-status-form/
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/what-we-do/workplace-and-skills/employment-
permits/employment-permit-status-form/)

**Email:** [ employmentpermits@enterprise.gov.ie
](mailto:employmentpermits@enterprise.gov.ie)

###  Immigrant Council of Ireland

2 St Andrew Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Information and Referral Service: Mon, Tues, Thurs, Fri
10am - 1pm

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 674 0200

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 645 8059

**Homepage:** [ https://www.immigrantcouncil.ie/
](https://www.immigrantcouncil.ie/)

###  Migrant Rights Centre Ireland

13 Lower Dorset Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland  
D01 Y893

**Tel:** (01) 889 7570

**Homepage:** [ https://www.mrci.ie/ ](https://www.mrci.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@mrci.ie ](mailto:info@mrci.ie)

###  International Organization for Migration

116 Lower Baggot Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 676 0655

**Locall:** Freephone: 1800 406 406

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 676 0656

**Homepage:** [ https://ireland.iom.int/ ](https://ireland.iom.int/)

**Email:** [ iomdublin@iom.int ](mailto:iomdublin@iom.int)

_**Page edited:** 14 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/migrant-workers-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Migrant%20workers%20and%20unemployment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/migrant-workers-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/migrant-workers-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Migrant%20workers%20and%20unemployment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/migrant-workers-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Volunteer development workers and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/working-abroad/voluntary-development-work-abroad-and-social-insurance/)

Irish citizens who have spent time working in a developing country may qualify
for Credited Social Insurance Contributions which can be used to claim social
welfare payments when they return to Ireland.

1242.5928

  * [ _Social workers in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/social-work-services/)

Social work services are provided through the public health services. The
Health Service Executive (HSE) is obliged to provide certain social work
services. Find out more.

952.03076

  * [ _Help to go home for migrants in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/help-to-go-home-for-migrants-in-ireland/)

The voluntary return programme helps undocumented migrants and people who
don’t have permission to remain in Ireland to return home.

949.592

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

