**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Debt ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/) > Glossary of debt terms

#  Glossary of debt terms

  * Introduction 
  * A to C 
  * D to L 
  * M to Q 
  * R to Z 

##  Introduction

This glossary contains some of the main terms used in connection with problem
debt and personal insolvency. The Competition and Consumer Protection
Commission (CCPC) also explains terms related to debt in the [ CCPC jargon
buster ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/jargon-buster/) .

##  A to C

###  Abhaile Scheme

[ Abhaile ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/abhaile-mortgage-
arrears-support/) is a free scheme that helps homeowners who are in **mortgage
arrears** and at risk of losing their homes. The [ Money Advice and Budgeting
Service (MABS) ](https://mabs.ie/) provides access to this service.

###  Approved Intermediary

An approved intermediary is a person authorised to help a **debtor** to make
an application for a [ Debt Relief Notice (DRN) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-notices/) .

###  Arrears

Arrears is a debt or payment that is not paid by the due date. It is another
term for missed payments.

###  Bankruptcy

[ Bankruptcy ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/what-is-bankruptcy/) is a settlement of the debts of someone who is
unable to repay their debts. It deals with both **secured** and **unsecured**
debt.

The purpose of the bankruptcy is to distribute your assets fairly among your
**creditors** and protect you from these **creditors** . The distribution is
done through a court official, the Official Assignee in Bankruptcy.

###  Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA)

The CCMA is a statutory code, issued by the Central Bank of Ireland, which
requires mortgage lenders to follow specific procedures when dealing with
borrowers who are facing **mortgage arrears** . Under this Code, each lender
must have a **Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP)** . [ Read more about
Consumer protection codes and mortgages ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/) .

###  Consolidation Loan

A consolidation loan is a new, single loan that combines (consolidates) more
than one outstanding debt. For example, a consolidation loan could combine
your credit card debt, mortgage or rent arrears, loan repayments and household
bills into one monthly payment.

###  Consumer credit agreements

A consumer credit agreement is a document that records the terms and
conditions of an agreement between a **creditor** and a **debtor** , where the
borrower is a consumer.

The rules on consumer credit agreements apply to almost all credit agreements,
hire-purchase agreements and consumer-hire agreements. They apply to
agreements to borrow money which you make with banks, building societies,
moneylenders and certain other finance companies. They do not apply to
agreements to borrow money from credit unions, pawnbrokers and utility service
providers or to agreements entered into by businesses.

Agreements covered by the [ consumer credit legislation
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) must be in
writing. If they are not in writing, they are not [ enforceable ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) . The
legislation provides that it is an offence for a **creditor** to demand
payment if the agreement is not enforceable.

The Central Bank’s [ Consumer Protection Code
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/#dcd924) applies to most
consumer credit agreements.

###  Contracts

In a debt context, a contract is an agreement by one party to provide goods or
services for another in return for payment. In general, contracts do not have
to be in writing to be enforceable. However, contracts for the sale of land
and contracts governed by the [ Consumer Credit Act 1995
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0024/index.html) must be in
writing to be enforceable.

Not paying is a breach of the contract. Contracts may have penalty clauses for
not meeting the terms of the contract. So, for example, the contract may say
you must pay an extra charge or interest if you don't pay on time.

###  Court judgment

A Court judgment may state that you owe a debt. Debt judgments can then be [
enforced in various ways ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) .

###  Credit history

[ Your credit history ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-
credit/your-credit-history/) is information held on the Central Credit
Register or Irish Credit Bureau’s database about credit agreements and your
repayment history.

Your credit report is available for lenders to consult when they are
considering a loan application. It is used to help lenders assess the ability
of borrowers to repay any future debts.

###  Creditor

The creditor is the person (or company) who you owe money to. This person is
known as the _judgment creditor_ if judgment is awarded against you in court.

###

##  D to L

###  Debt forbearance and forgiveness

_Debt forbearance_ is the term that is sometimes used by **creditors** when
they agree to change how your debt will be repaid, for example, by postponing
some payments or by changing the plan for repayments. You continue to owe all
the money and you will eventually have to repay it all.

_Debt forgiveness_ or cancellation occurs when your **creditor** decides not
to collect the debt.

###  Debt management firms

A debt management firm provides services that include:

  * Assessing a borrower’s financial circumstances 
  * Giving advice about how to resolve a borrower’s debts 
  * Negotiating with creditors on behalf of borrowers 

There are a number of private commercial debt management firms, which are
regulated by the Central Bank. The Central Bank has published a [ Consumer
Guide to debt management services (pdf)
](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/regulation/industry-market-
sectors/debt-management-firms/debt-management-services.pdf?sfvrsn=0) .

The [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/mabs-service/) is a non-commercial body providing debt management
services and it does not charge fees.

###  Debt Relief Notice (DRN)

The [ Debt Relief Notice ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/debt-relief-notices/) is a debt solution designed for people who
have very low disposable income or assets. It allows for the write-off of
qualifying debt up to €20,000, subject to a 3-year supervision period.

###  Debt Settlement Arrangement (DSA)

The [ Debt Settlement Arrangement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-settlement-arrangements/) is a debt
solution for _unsecured_ debts, usually over a period of 5 years. (See
**Secured loan** below for definition.) The limit of 5 years can increase to 6
years in some situations. When the DSA concludes successfully, the debts that
it covers will be fully settled.

###  Debtor

You are a debtor if you owe money to someone. If a court judgment is awarded
against you, you are a _judgment debtor_ .

###  Debts and criminal offences

Most debts arise because you have failed to meet the terms of a contract. For
example, you borrow money from the bank or credit union and you don't pay it
back, or you enter into an agreement to buy equipment by instalments and you
don't pay. It is a breach of contract to not pay your debts - it is not
generally a criminal offence.

However, it is a criminal offence to not pay certain debts. For example, it is
an offence not to pay your taxes or your TV licence fee. You may be charged
and convicted for failure to pay such debts. Even if you are charged,
convicted and fined, you still owe the debt and can be sued for it in the
normal way.

###  Excluded and excludable debts

The Personal Insolvency Act 2012 sets out certain types of debt that
**cannot** be written off by a **Debt Relief Notice** , a **Debt Settlement
Arrangement** or a **Personal Insolvency Arrangement** . These are called
_excluded_ debts and are debts due:

  * Under family law orders, such as maintenance orders for spouses and children 
  * Under court awards for personal injury or death 
  * From a loan (or forbearance of a loan) got by fraud 
  * Under court orders made under the Proceeds of Crime Acts or fines imposed by the courts for criminal offences 

The types of debt that **may** be written off are called _excludable_ debts
and are:

  * Taxes, duties or levies owed to the State, such as income tax, the Local Property Tax, VAT, capital taxes 
  * Service charges owed to local authorities 
  * Rates 
  * Money owed under the [ Nursing Homes Loan ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/fair-deal-scheme/#5ed1d3)
  * Money owed to the Department of Social Protection 
  * Debts due to owners’ management companies in respect of annual service charges or contributions due for multi-unit developments (this is the only non-State debt in this category) 

##  M to Q

###  Mortgage arrears

Mortgage payments that a person has not paid by the time they are due. See
also ‘ **Arrears** ’.

The Central Bank has an [ infographic on mortgage arrears
](https://www.centralbank.ie/consumer-hub/explainers/explainer-how-does-the-
central-bank-protect-people-in-mortgage-arrears) .

###  Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP)

Under the Central Bank's [ Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA) (pdf)
](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/news-and-media/press-
releases/2015/April/2013-ccma.pdf) mortgage lenders must operate a [ Mortgage
Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-
arrears/consumer-protection-codes-and-mortgages/) when dealing with borrowers
in mortgage arrears or in pre-arrears. The 4 steps of the MARP are:
communication; financial information; assessment; and resolution.

###  Personal insolvency

There are 3 debt resolution mechanisms for people who cannot afford to pay
their personal debts:

  * [ Debt Relief Notice (DRN) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-relief-notices/)
  * [ Debt Settlement Arrangement (DSA) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-settlement-arrangements/)
  * [ Personal Insolvency Arrangement (PIA) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-arrangements/)

These arrangements offer different solutions to people in different
situations. [ Read more about these personal insolvency options
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-options/) .

###  Personal Insolvency Arrangement (PIA)

If you cannot pay your personal debts a [ Personal Insolvency Arrangement
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-
insolvency-arrangements/) can provide an agreed settlement and/or
restructuring of **secured debts** up to a total of €3 million (as well as
unsecured debts) over a period of 6 years. The cap of €3 million can be
increased by agreement with your secured **creditors** and the limit of 6
years can increase to 7 years in some situations.

###  Personal Insolvency Practitioner (PIP)

A Personal Insolvency Practitioner (PIP) is a professional who is authorised
by the [ Insolvency Service of Ireland (ISI)
](personal_insolvency/insolvency_service_of_ireland.en.html) and will act on
your behalf throughout a **Debt Settlement Arrangement** or a **Personal
Insolvency Arrangement** .

###  Prescribed Financial Statement

A [ Prescribed Financial Statement (PFS)
](http://www.isi.gov.ie/en/ISI/Pages/Prescribed_Financial_Statement) is a
written statement of a debtor’s financial affairs. Every applicant must
complete a PFS with the help of an **Approved Intermediary** (for a **Debt
Relief Notice** ) or a **Personal Insolvency Practitioner** (for a [ Debt
Settlement Arrangement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-
insolvency/debt-settlement-arrangements/) or [ Personal Insolvency Arrangement
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-
insolvency-arrangements/) ).

The PFS is used to:

  * See if you are eligible for a debt resolution mechanism 
  * Calculate the contribution to be paid to your creditors over the period of a [ Debt Settlement Arrangement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/debt-settlement-arrangements/) or [ Personal Insolvency Arrangement ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/personal-insolvency/personal-insolvency-arrangements/) . 
  * Find which debts will no longer apply at the end of an arrangement 

###  Priority debt

The term _priority debt_ can be used in a general sense but it can also have a
specific legal meaning. If you owe money to a number of **creditors** , you
have your own view of which of these debts take priority. Most people would
regard the repayments on their home as taking priority over the repayment of
some other loans.

The legal meaning of _priority debt_ may be different. For example, in
receiverships, liquidations and **bankruptcy** , the law sets out the order in
which the debts must be paid.

###  Protective certificate

This is a certificate issued by a court to protect the debtor against legal
proceedings by a creditor while a **Personal Insolvency Arrangement (PIA)** or
a **Debt Settlement Arrangement (DSA)** is being put in place.

The protective certificate gives you 70 days during which your **creditors**
must not:

  * Start or continue legal proceedings in respect of the debt 
  * Take or continue any steps to enforce a judgment or contact you about the debt unless you agree to this 
  * Start or continue bankruptcy proceedings against you. 

###  Qualifying debt

Qualifying debts are debts that can be included in a **Debt Relief Notice** .
Examples of qualifying debts are credit cards, overdrafts, personal loans,
moneylender loans and arrears on utility bills or rent payments. To apply for
a **Debt Relief Notice** , you must have €35,000 or less of Qualifying Debts.

###

##  R to Z

###  Reasonable living expenses

You are entitled to a reasonable standard of living while you address your
debt problems. Reasonable living expenses is a term used by the Insolvency
Service of Ireland (ISI) to refer to the amount of money needed for you and
your household to have a reasonable standard of living. This minimum standard
of living allows for expenses such as food, clothing, health, education,
transport, childcare and insurance.

The ISI has prepared detailed guidelines on what constitutes [ reasonable
living expenses ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/8df24-reasonable-living-
expenses/) .

###  Repayment arrangement

A repayment arrangement is a voluntary agreement between a **debtor** and one
or more of their **creditors** , about how they will repay their debt. It is
sometimes called an alternative repayment arrangement (ARA) or a debt
repayment plan.

You should get all arrangements in writing and keep copies for your records.
Let your **creditors** know if you cannot keep up the repayments as agreed, as
you may be able to renegotiate the terms of your arrangement.

###  Repossess

This means to take back ownership of something. For example, a [ home
repossession ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/home-
repossession/) is when a mortgage provider takes over a person’s home because
they have failed to pay back their mortgage on time.

###  Secured loan

If a loan is secured it means that property or goods are provided as security
against non-payment. Mortgages are the most common secured loans. Sometimes,
business loans and other loans are also secured against property.

In general, debts such as bank loans and credit card debt are **unsecured** .
However, if you decide to roll up such loans into your mortgage, they become
**secured loans** .

If the property or goods on which the security is based are subsequently sold,
the secured loan must be paid off before the proceeds can be used for any
other purposes.

###  Simple contract debt

If you have a debt because you have not paid for goods or services that are
not covered by any special rules, this is called a simple contract debt. For
example, if you buy goods using a cheque and the cheque is not honoured, there
is a simple contract debt to the seller. If you use the services of a plumber
and do not pay him, there is a simple contract debt to the plumber. The seller
or the plumber can go to court to get judgment against you and then enforce
that judgment.

A range of legislation provides that various fees and levies which have not
been paid may be dealt with in court in the same way as simple contract debts.

###  Sheriff

Sheriffs are self-employed people who [ enforce debt judgments. ](/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/) Sheriffs can
collect outstanding debts from you by seizing your property or goods. Sheriffs
operate in counties Cork and Dublin. County Registrars enforce debt judgments
in all other places. Sheriffs are paid for their enforcement work on a
commission basis.

As well as County Sheriffs in Cork and Dublin, Revenue Sheriffs enforce debts
owed to the Revenue Commissioners. They have the power to collect tax debts.
They can do this on the basis of a certificate of liability issued by the
Collector General and do not need a court order. Revenue debts can also be
collected in the normal way if there is a court order.

###  Standard Financial Statement

A Standard Financial Statement (SFS) is a summary of your finances that you
can use to explain your financial circumstances to a creditor and agree a
repayment plan.

The Central Bank has a [ consumer guide (pdf)
](https://www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-source/Regulation/consumer-
protection/other-codes-of-conduct/35-gns-4-2-7-mortgage-arrears---
sfs.pdf?sfvrsn=4) to completing an SFS.

###  Time limits (Statute of Limitations)

There are time limits (limitation periods) for taking most types of court
action.

The law in relation to time limits is complex but, in general, there is a time
limit of 6 years for taking actions for:

  * Breach of contract (for example, failure to pay for goods or services provided) 
  * Debt judgments 
  * Non-payment of charges such as rent 

If your **creditor** does not start the court action within 6 years of the
debt being due, the action can be held to be _statute-barred_ by the court.
However, you must raise the fact that the creditor’s action is statute barred
and win. If you win, this effectively means that you cannot be forced by the
court to pay the debt even though the debt still exists.

If your **creditor** gets a judgment, then, in general, they have 12 years to
[ enforce that judgment ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-
of-debt-judgments/) .

###  Unsecured loan

This is a loan that is not attached to any asset, for example credit card debt
or a personal loan.

If a person does not repay their loan, the lender is not allowed take any of
their assets without taking the person to court to get an enforcement order
for the **Sheriff** . However, the lender still has a legal right to recover
the debt and can do so by taking the **debtor** to court.

_**Page edited:** 27 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/glossary-of-debt-
terms/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Glossary%20of%20debt%20terms&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/glossary-of-debt-
terms/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/debt/glossary-of-debt-
terms/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Glossary%20of%20debt%20terms&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/debt/glossary-of-debt-
terms/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Overview of problem debt_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/dealing-with-debt/)

Debts can easily get out of control. Steps you can take to manage debt
problems.

1481.2659

  * [ _Overview of mortgage debt_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/mortgage-arrears/overview-of-mortgage-debt/)

Information for people facing mortgage arrears.

1240.1006

  * [ _Enforcement of debt judgments_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/enforcement-of-debt-judgments/)

Find out about how a creditor (someone you owe money to) can enforce a court
judgment if you do not repay a debt.

1165.8789

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

