**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Asylum seekers and refugees ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/)
> [ After you are granted international protection ](/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/) >
Travel documents for refugees

#  Travel documents for refugees

  * Introduction 
  * Who can get a travel document? 
  * Travelling to Ireland with a ‘convention’ travel document 
  * How to apply for a travel document 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

A travel document allows people living in Ireland who cannot get a passport to
travel outside Ireland. People who have been declared a refugee are entitled
to a 1951 Convention Travel Document.

You may also be able to get a travel document if you have subsidiary
protection status, and you cannot get a national passport from your country of
nationality.

You should note that travel documents take 26 weeks or more to process.

You may also need a visa to enter other countries. You should check always
with the embassy of the country where you to plan to travel before you go
there.

##  Who can get a travel document?

You may be eligible for a travel document if you:

  * Have been declared a refugee 
  * Have been granted Subsidiary Protection status 
  * Have been granted permission to live in Ireland following a request by the United National High Commissioner for Refugees (a _programme refugee_ ) 
  * You are the family member of any of the above 

###  Family members

You may get a travel document if you are a family member of someone with
refugee or subsidiary protection status. You must show that you have tried to
get a passport or travel document from your country of nationality.

Your children need their own travel documents.

###  Refugees

If you were declared a refugee following an application for international
protection, you can get a refugee travel document. It says “Convention of 28
July 1951” on the front cover. It is sometimes called a ‘1951 Convention
Travel Document’. You can travel to most countries in the EU without a visa,
and stay for up to 90 days using this travel document. You should check with
the embassy of the country where you plan to travel.

Programme refugees cannot get a 1951 Convention Travel Document. Instead, you
can apply for a regular travel document.

A travel document for refugee is valid for a maximum of 5 years.

###  People with subsidiary protection status

If you were granted subsidiary protection following an application for
international protection, ISD may give you a travel document if you cannot get
a passport from your country of nationality.

This travel document is valid for up to 5 years (or until your residency is
due for renewal).

##  Travelling to Ireland with a ‘convention’ travel document

**Since 19 July 2022** , if you have a refugee [ travel document issued by a
country outside Ireland ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/0b410-visa-free-
travel-for-people-with-refugee-status-further-suspended/) , you must apply for
a visa to enter Ireland.

##  How to apply for a travel document

You can [ apply for a travel document online
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-join-family-in-ireland/applying-
for-a-travel-document/) for a fee of €55.

You can also apply by post. To get a paper form, you must email your request
to INISTravdoc@justice.ie

##  Further information

You can find [ information about travel documents
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/coming-to-join-family-in-ireland/applying-
for-a-travel-document/) on the website of the Irish Immigration Service
Delivery.

###  Travel Document Unit

Ministerial Decisions Unit

Repatriation Division  
Immigration Services Delivery  
13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ https://www.irishimmigration.ie/
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/)

**Email:** [ INIStravdoc@justice.ie ](mailto:INIStravdoc@justice.ie)

###  Re-entry Visa Processing Office

Department of Justice

Immigration Service Delivery  
13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** 8.30am - 1:30pm Mon-Fri (excluding public holidays)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.irishimmigration.ie/
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 20 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/travel-
documents-for-refugees/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Travel%20documents%20for%20refugees&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/travel-
documents-for-refugees/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/travel-
documents-for-refugees/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Travel%20documents%20for%20refugees&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/travel-
documents-for-refugees/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Your rights when you travel on a ferry or cruise_ ](/en/consumer/travel/your-rights-when-you-travel-on-a-ferry-or-cruise/)

When travelling in the EU by ferry or cruise ship, you have rights if there
are delays or cancellations. Find out more about what to do if things go
wrong.

1161.7942

  * [ _Accommodation Recognition Payment for hosting refugees from Ukraine_ ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/accommodation-recognition-payment/)

The Accommodation Recognition Payment is a monthly payment for people
providing accommodation to people fleeing the conflict in Ukraine.

1137.0286

  * [ _Your rights when you travel by bus or coach_ ](/en/consumer/travel/your-rights-when-you-travel-by-bus-or-coach/)

When travelling in the EU by bus or coach, you have rights if there are delays
or cancellations. Find out more about what to do if things go wrong.

1127.8928

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

