**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Deeds of covenant

#  Deeds of covenant

  * What is a deed of covenant? 
  * What covenants qualify for tax relief? 
  * How to make a deed of covenant 
  * How to make a payment under a deed of covenant 
  * What is the tax relief on a deed of covenant? 
  * How to claim tax relief 

##  What is a deed of covenant?

A deed of covenant is a written legal agreement for one person to pay another
an amount without getting any benefit in return.

The person who

  * Makes the payment is called a _covenantor_
  * Gets the payment is called a _covenantee_

You can agree to pay any amount of money under the deed. However, only certain
covenants qualify for tax relief.

##  What covenants qualify for tax relief?

You can claim tax relief on a covenant to:

  * An adult who is permanently incapacitated 
  * A minor who is permanently incapacitated but is not your child 
  * Someone aged over 65 (this relief is limited to 5% of your total income) 

The exact tax saving depends on the:

  * Amount of tax paid by the covenantor 
  * Amount of the income of the covenantee 

To receive tax relief, a deed of covenant must last more than 6 years. Revenue
recommends that you make a covenant that lasts at least 7 years.  

##  How to make a deed of covenant

You can make a covenant by completing the [ Deed of Covenant Form for
Individuals (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/deed-of-covenant.pdf) . You can also ask a professional
adviser such as a solicitor or accountant to make a deed.

The deed must be properly drawn up, signed, witnessed, sealed and delivered to
the covenantee.

If you are the covenantee, you must have a [ PPS number ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) .

If you are the covenantor, you must not get any benefit (either directly or
indirectly) in return for paying the agreed amount.

A deed must last for more than 6 years. It is only effective from the date it
is made and cannot be backdated.

##  How to make a payment under a deed of covenant

You must make the deed before you make any payments. You should make sure that
you are able to make all payments before the deed ends.

Payments must be paid on the dates that are set out in the deed and for the
amount specified. You cannot change the amount or frequency of payments during
the period of the deed.

If you are the covenantor, you must complete [ Form R185 - Certificate of
Income Tax Deducted ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/form-r185.pdf) and deduct tax at the standard rate each
time you make a payment.

##  What is the tax relief on a deed of covenant?

**If you make a payment** under a deed of covenant, you deduct tax on the
payment at the standard rate of 20% and send it Revenue.

The tax relief you get depends on your income and whether you pay the standard
20% rate of income tax or the higher 40% rate of income tax.

If you only pay the 20% rate of tax on your income, then there is no
difference between your 20% income tax and the 20% you deducted from the
payment. This means there is no benefit of tax relief.

If you pay the higher 40% rate of tax on your income, the tax relief you get
is the difference between the 40% you usually pay and the 20% you deducted
from the payment. So, you can get tax relief of 20%.

**If you get a payment** under a deed of covenant, tax has been deducted at
20%. If you have total income below the limit for paying income tax, you can
have this refunded to you. Your total income includes the covenant payments
you get plus any other source of income.

##  How to claim tax relief

###  If you are the covenantor

If you are the covenantor, the first time you claim relief you have to send
Revenue:

  * A copy of the deed of covenant 
  * A completed [ Form R185 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/documents/form-r185.pdf)

For following years, complete Form R185 after each payment date and send it to
your [ Revenue office ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) .

If you are a PAYE employee, you can either:

  * Claim the relief online by using [ myAccount ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) to make a tax return or 
  * Complete the [ Claim form for Deed of Covenant (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/documents/claim-form-deed-of-covenant.pdf) and send it to your Revenue office 

If you are [ self-assessed ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/business/self-
assessment.html) you can claim relief when you submit your annual tax return.

###  If you are the covenantee

If you are the covenantee, you must make sure you are [ registered for tax
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/starting-your-first-job/what-
you-should-do.aspx) . You will need to declare your covenant payments to
Revenue. In the first year you should send Revenue:

  * A completed [ Claim Form for Deed of Covenant (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-employment/documents/claim-form-deed-of-covenant.pdf)
  * The original deed of covenant 
  * A completed [ Form 54 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/additional-incomes/documents/dirt/form54-claims.pdf)
  * The Form R185 that has been completed by the covenantor 
  * Proof that you have received the payment or payments 

For following years, you send Form R185 and the Form 54 to Revenue.

_**Page edited:** 29 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/deeds-of-
covenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Deeds%20of%20covenant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/deeds-of-
covenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/deeds-of-
covenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Deeds%20of%20covenant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/deeds-of-
covenant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Property deeds_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/property-deeds/)

Each time the ownership of a property changes, a new deed of title is drawn up
to record the change. Tailte Eireann is responsible for 2 systems for
recording property transactions.

954.71155

  * [ _How to dispose of an end-of-life vehicle_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/how-to-dispose-of-an-end-of-life-vehicle/)

An end-of-life vehicle is a car or light vehicle that is ready to go to the
scrapyard. There are laws in place to stop ELVs from creating an environmental
hazard, and to promote recycling.

844.3827

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

831.1804

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

