**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Personal finance ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/) > [ Pensions
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/) > Introduction to pensions

#  Introduction to pensions

  * Introduction 
  * Occupational pensions 
  * Personal pensions 
  * Link with social welfare pensions 
  * Regulation of pensions 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

A pension is a long-term savings plan that you can use to build up a fund to
give you pension payments when you retire from work. You can get [ tax relief
when you pay into your pension ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/) .

There are different types of pensions:

  * Occupational pensions are provided by your employer 
  * Personal pensions, also known as private pensions, are provided by a life assurance or investment provider 

For information about social welfare pensions, read about [ income supports
for older people ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/income-
supports-for-older-people/) .

##  Occupational pensions

An occupational pension is a pension provided by your employer. They are also
known as company or employersâ€™ pension plans. Occupational pension schemes
provide a regular income after retirement. Some also give you a lump sum
payment when you retire.

In a **defined contribution** scheme, the contributions you make are set and
the benefits you get depend on the amount of the contributions you make.

In a **defined benefit** scheme, the benefit you are entitled to is set in
advance. It could, for example, be linked to your length of service.

[ Read more about occupational pensions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/occupational-pensions/)

##  Personal pensions

You may prefer not to join an occupational pension scheme, or you may not have
the option to (for example, if you are self-employed or your employer does not
offer such a scheme). In these cases, you can save for retirement by choosing
a different type of pension plan. These are usually known as personal pension
plans or private pension plans and are managed by a life assurance or
investment company.

The two main types of personal pension plan are:

  * A Personal Retirement Savings Account (PRSA) is like an investment account that you use to save for your retirement 
  * A Retirement Annuity Contract (RAC) is a type of insurance contract that provides pension benefits when you retire 

If your employer offers a PRSA rather than an occupational pension, they must
deduct contributions from your salary and send these payments to the PRSA
provider. The employer may also contribute to the PRSA but does not have to.

Read more about [ personal pensions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/personal-pensions/) and [ PRSAs ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/personal-retirement-savings-accounts/) .

##  Link with social welfare pensions

Occupational and personal pensions are independent of the social welfare
pension system (which includes a [ contributory State Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) and a [ non-
contributory State Pension ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-non-contributory/) ).

However, it is common for occupational pensions to take into account the
amount of the social welfare when calculating the level of benefit. For
example, some schemes provide for a benefit which, taken together with the
social welfare pension, will give you a half or two-thirds of your final
salary. These schemes are sometimes called integrated or co-ordinated schemes.

##  Regulation of pensions

The [ Pensions Authority ](http://www.pensionsauthority.ie/) is the regulatory
body for [ occupational pension schemes ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/occupational-pensions/) and [ Personal Retirement Savings
Accounts (PRSAs) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/personal-
retirement-savings-accounts/) and certain Retirement Annuity Contracts (RACs).
It is responsible for overseeing the proper administration of pension schemes
and the protection of pension rights.

The [ Financial Services and Pensions Ombudsman ](https://www.fspo.ie/) is the
body responsible for dealing with complaints against the providers of these
pensions. For more information, read [ making a complaint about your pension.
](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/making-a-pension-complaint/)

##  Further information

Information about your own scheme is available from the trustees of the
scheme. Information on pensions and your rights is available from the [
Pensions Authority ](http://www.pensionsauthority.ie/) .

###  Pensions Authority

Verschoyle House  
28-30 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 613 1900

**Homepage:** [ https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@pensionsauthority.ie ](mailto:info@pensionsauthority.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/introduction-to-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Introduction%20to%20pensions&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/introduction-to-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/pensions/introduction-to-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Introduction%20to%20pensions&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/introduction-to-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The Pensions Authority_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/the-pensions-authority/)

The Pensions Authority is the regulatory body for Occupational Pension Schemes
and Personal Retirement Savings Accounts (PRSAs).

923.1477

  * [ _Tax relief on pensions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/)

You can get income tax relief on your pension contributions. You can also get
tax relief on a lump sum pension payment when you retire.

913.0122

  * [ _Taxation of pensions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/taxation-of-pensions/)

How different types of pensions are taxed in Ireland.

864.49634

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

