**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Money and Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/) > [
Tax ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Income tax credits and reliefs ](/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Tax relief on medical expenses

#  Tax relief on medical expenses

  * Introduction 
  * What healthcare expenses can I claim tax back on? 
  * Travelling abroad for treatment 
  * Dental and optical (eye) treatment 
  * Nursing home care 
  * Children with serious illness or permanent disability 
  * Health insurance 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

You can claim income tax back on some types of healthcare expenses. Tax relief
for most expenses is at the standard rate of tax. Relief on nursing home
expenses is available at your highest rate of income tax.

You can claim tax relief on medical expenses you pay for yourself or for any
other person.

You must claim tax relief within the 4 years following the year in which you
paid for the healthcare.

Tax relief is also available for premiums paid for  health insurance  . This
tax relief is included in the amount you pay, so you do not have to claim this
relief.

##  What healthcare expenses can I claim tax back on?

You can claim tax relief on:

  * Doctor and consultant fees 
  * Maintenance or treatment in a hospital, treatment facility (such as a clinic) or a [ nursing home ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/nursing-home-and-additional-nursing-care-expenses.aspx)
  * [ Transport by ambulance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/emergency-health-services-in-ireland/)
  * Employing a qualified nurse at home 
  * Treatment from a psychologist or psychotherapist 
  * Acupuncture 
  * [ Kidney patients' expenses ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/additional-expenses-for-a-kidney-patient.aspx)
  * Specialised dental treatment 
  * Maternity care 
  * [ In-vitro fertilisation (IVF) ](/en/birth-family-relationships/before-your-baby-is-born/fertility-treatments-and-dahr/)
  * [ Speech and language therapy ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/care-in-your-community/speech-and-language-therapy-services/) for a child under 18 or in full-time education 
  * Educational psychological assessments for a child under 18 or in full-time education 

####  Must be prescribed

The following healthcare qualifies for tax relief if prescribed by a doctor:

  * Drugs and medicines 
  * Diagnostic procedures 
  * Physiotherapy or similar treatment 
  * Chiropody or podiatry (foot treatments) 
  * Orthoptic or similar treatment (for example, treatments for squints and eye movement disorders) 
  * Home nursing for a serious illness 

These aids and devices qualify for tax relief if prescribed by a doctor:

  * Hearing aid 
  * Orthopaedic bed or chair 
  * Wheelchair or wheelchair lift (no relief is due for alteration to the building to facilitate a lift) 
  * Glucometer machine for a diabetic 
  * A computer needed by someone with a severe disability to help them communicate 

You can also claim for gluten-free food if you have coeliac disease or
diabetic products if you have diabetes. Instead of a prescription, you can use
a letter from a doctor stating that you have coeliac disease or diabetes. You
can use receipts from supermarkets or chemists.

These lists do not include every expense that is eligible. Revenue adds to the
list of treatments and appliances that you can get tax relief on from time to
time. If you are undergoing a new procedure or availing of a new appliance, it
is worth checking whether you can claim tax relief. For more information, see
the [ Revenue website ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-
and-exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/index.aspx) .

####  Expenses that are excluded

You cannot claim tax back for expenses refunded by:

  * A public or local authority, for example, the HSE (Health Service Executive) 
  * An insurance policy 
  * Any other source, for example, compensation 

If you have private health insurance, you can claim tax relief on the portion
of those qualifying expenses not covered by your insurer.

You cannot claim relief for cosmetic surgery costs, unless you need the
surgery as a result of a personal injury, disease or congenital abnormality.

##  Travelling abroad for treatment

You can claim tax relief on the cost of medical treatment you get outside
Ireland. The healthcare provider must be entitled to practise in the country
where the care is provided.

If the qualifying healthcare is only available outside Ireland, you can also
claim for reasonable travel and accommodation expenses. If you need someone to
go with you because of your medical condition, their expenses may be covered
(for one accompanying person).

If your child needs to travel for treatment, the expenses of both parents may
be allowed in special cases where it is necessary for you both to be with the
child.

##  Dental and optical (eye) treatment

####  Optical treatment

You cannot get tax relief for routine ophthalmic (eye) treatment – sight
tests, glasses or contact lenses.

You can get tax relief for orthoptic or similar treatment prescribed by a
doctor. This means the examination and treatment by exercise of squints and
other eye disorders.

####  Dental treatment

You **cannot** get tax relief for routine dental treatment:

  * Extractions 
  * Scaling or cleaning 
  * Fillings 
  * Artificial teeth and dentures 

You **can** get tax relief for the following dental treatments:

  * Crowns 
  * Veneers or Rembrandt-type etched fillings 
  * Tip replacing 
  * Gold or fibreglass posts 
  * Inlays 
  * Endodontics (root canal treatment) 
  * Periodontal treatment for gum disease 
  * Orthodontic treatment (braces and related treatments) 
  * Surgical extraction of impacted wisdom teeth 
  * Bridgework 

##  Nursing home care

You can claim tax relief on expenses for a nursing home if it provides 24-hour
on-site nursing care.

You can claim the tax relief for nursing home expenses that you pay for
yourself or for someone else.

This relief applies at the highest rate of income tax you pay. If you pay the
higher rate of tax, the higher rate of 40% applies to income that is above the
[ standard rate cut-off point ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/#d43041) . The nursing home
expenses you pay are deducted from your total income, reducing the amount of
your income that is taxable at the higher rate. Revenue provides examples of [
tax relief on nursing home expenses ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-
credits-reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/nursing-home-
and-additional-nursing-care-expenses.aspx) .

If you avail of the [ Fair Deal Nursing Home Loan
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/health-
services-for-older-people/fair-deal-scheme/#5ed1d3) , you or your estate can
claim tax relief when the loan is repaid. This is usually when you sell the
asset that was used as security or after you die.

###  Home nursing

You can claim relief on the cost of employing a qualified nurse at home at the
standard rate of 20%.

See the Revenue website for [ more information on employing a qualified nurse
in the home ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/employing-a-carer/health-expenses-for-home-
nursing.aspx) .

##  Children with serious illness or permanent disability

You can claim tax relief on the following expenses if your child needs
constant or regular hospital care and they have:

  * An illness that is life threatening 
  * Cancer 
  * A permanent disability 

**Telephone:** If your child is being treated at home, you can claim a [ flat
rate relief to cover telephone rental and calls
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/additional-health-care-expenses-for-
a-child.aspx) that are directly related to the treatment.

**Overnight accommodation:** If you are the parent or guardian and you have to
stay near the hospital overnight for your child’s treatment, you can claim
relief on the cost of the accommodation.

**Travel:** For trips essential to the treatment of your child, you can claim
for travelling to and from hospital, for the costs of the child and the
parents or guardians. There is a [ mileage allowance if you use a private car
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/additional-health-care-expenses-for-
a-child.aspx) .

**Hygiene products and special clothing:** You can claim up to €500 for
hygiene products and special clothing needed for your child’s treatment.

##  Health insurance

If you have [ health insurance ](/en/health/health-system/private-health-
insurance/) , you can get tax relief on the premium you pay to an [ approved
insurer ](https://www.hia.ie/regulation/register-of-health-benefit-
undertakings/ru_list) .

You do not need to claim the relief – it is given as a reduction in the amount
of the insurance premium you pay. This is known as tax relief at source.

However, in some situations tax relief at source does not apply, for example,
where an employer pays the medical insurance premiums on behalf of an
employee. This is treated as a Benefit in Kind and tax is due on the total
amount.

This means that the employee does not get the tax relief at source on the
insurance premium. You can instead [ make a claim directly to Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/medical-insurance-premiums/index.aspx) .

The relief is given at the rate of 20% of the cost. This is up to a maximum of
€1,000 per adult and €500 per child. A child is someone under 21 years of age
that a child premium has been paid for.

##  Rates

Tax relief on medical and health expenses is given at the standard rate of
20%.

However, tax relief on nursing home expenses can be claimed at your highest
rate of tax. This means that the portion of your income which is taxable at
your highest rate of tax is reduced.

##  How to apply

You must claim tax relief within the 4 years that follow the year you paid for
the healthcare.

If you received healthcare in one year but paid for it the following year, you
can choose to claim the relief for either year.

####  Apply online

If you are a PAYE (Pay As You Earn) taxpayer, you can [ claim tax relief
online using myAccount ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/how-do-you-claim-health-
expenses.aspx) .

If are a self-assessed taxpayer, use [ Revenue Online Service (ROS)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/support/ros-help/getting-started-
on-ros/about-ros/index.aspx) and complete the health expenses section on your
annual Income Tax Return (Form 11).

####  Receipts

You can only claim for medical expenses if you have receipts to prove your
claim. For dental expenses, your dentist should complete [ Form Med 2 (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/documents/med2.pdf) for you to use as a receipt.

Revenue's myAccount service includes a [ receipts tracker service
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/common/manage-your-
receipts-with-receipts-tracker.aspx) which allows you to store your receipt
details online. If you use this service, you can claim tax relief under the
Real Time Credit service. This means that you can claim for health expenses
and nursing home expenses when you pay them and get increased tax credits in
your next payroll payment from your employer. You can [ make a Real Time
Credit claim using myAccount ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-
reliefs-and-exemptions/real-time-credits/making-real-time-credit-claim.aspx) .

If you don't use the receipt tracker, you must keep your medical receipts for
6 years because Revenue may ask to see them.

####  Apply offline

You can also claim medical expenses relief offline by completing a paper [
Form 12 (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/form12.pdf) and returning it to your Revenue office. If
you are not able to use Revenue’s online services you can use [ Form 12S (pdf
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/form-12s.pdf) ) (a simplified version for routine tax
returns). You can also request to have a Form 12 or Form 12S sent to you by
calling Revenue on (01) 738 3675 or by emailing [ custform@revenue.ie
](mailto:custform@revenue.ie) .

##  More information

Additional information is available on the [ Revenue website
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/personal-tax-credits-reliefs-and-
exemptions/health-and-age/health-expenses/index.aspx) or by [ contacting
Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) .

_**Page edited:** 16 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-
expenses/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20relief%20on%20medical%20expenses&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-
expenses/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-
expenses/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20relief%20on%20medical%20expenses&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/taxation-and-medical-
expenses/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax relief on nursing home fees and for dependent relatives_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/tax-relief-on-nursing-home-fees-and-for-dependent-relatives/)

Tax relief is available on fees paid for nursing homes and for dependent
relatives. Information on tax credits and how to apply for tax relief.

1443.3214

  * [ _Tax relief on pensions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/)

You can get income tax relief on your pension contributions. You can also get
tax relief on a lump sum pension payment when you retire.

1127.8431

  * [ _Tax relief on assistance dogs_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-credits-and-reliefs-for-people-with-disabilities/tax-relief-on-assistance-dogs/)

Assistance dogs are specially trained dogs that help people with a disability
carry out practical tasks. If you own an assistance dog, you can claim tax
relief.

1102.9431

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

