**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Moving Country ](/en/moving-country/) > [
Coming to work in Ireland ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/) > [
Employment permits and the right to work ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/) > Reactivation Employment Permit

#  Reactivation Employment Permit

  * Introduction 
  * Who is eligible for a ReactivationEmployment Permit? 
  * How to apply 
  * Your family 
  * Changing or losing your job 
  * Fees 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you had a valid employment permit and could not renew it through no fault
of your own, or because you were mistreated or exploited by your employer, you
may be able to get a Reactivation Employment Permit.

You must get permission from Immigration Service Delivery (ISD) and have a
valid Irish Residence Permit before you apply for the permit.

To get a Reactivation Employment Permit you must:

  * Have previously held an employment permit 
  * Be unemployed 
  * Have a job offer 
  * Have a temporary Stamp 1 immigration permission and a “Reactivation Employment Permit” letter from ISD. 

The Reactivation Employment Permit is available for all occupations, except
domestic jobs (other than [ certain carers ](https://dbei.gov.ie/en/What-We-
Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Employment-Permit-
Eligibility/Carers-in-private-homes/) ).

A [ labour market needs test ](/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/work-permits#l27fdb) is not required.

##  Who is eligible for a ReactivationEmployment Permit?

You can apply for the Reactivation Employment Permit if you are in one of the
following categories:

####  General Employment Permit holders

  * If you had a General Employment Permit and you have fallen out of the system (you no longer have a valid IRP) through no fault of your own. 
  * You have a work permit for a low-skilled and low-paid job and want to change employer but do not qualify for a General Employment Permit 

####  Spouses and partners

  * You have a Spousal/Dependent Employment Permit and want to change jobs, but do not qualify for a new permit or Stamp 1G (because, for example, you are separated from your spouse). 

Some [ other categories ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-
and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Permit-Types/Reactivation-Employment-Permit/) of
former employment permit holders may also apply.

###  You cannot get a Reactivation Employment Permit if:

  * You entered the State as a student or visitor and have never held an employment permit 
  * You have already been granted a Reactivation Employment Permit (unless you are changing jobs or have been made redundant) 
  * You hold a [ Critical Skills ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/green-card-permits/) , or [ General Employment Permit ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/work-permits/) and you have been made redundant. 
  * You hold an [ Intra-Company Transfer ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Permit-Types/Intra-Company-Transfer-Employment-Permit/) , [ Contract for Services ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Permit-Types/Contract-for-Services-Employment-Permit/) , [ Internship ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Permit-Types/Internship-Employment-Permit/) or [ Exchange Agreement Employment Permit ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Permit-Types/Exchange-Agreement-Employment-Permit/) and you have stayed in Ireland after your permit expired 
  * You previously had an employment permit and stamp 1 immigration permission but changed your status to another stamp. 

You can read more about the [ eligibility criteria for the Reactivation
Employment Permit ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/reactivation-employment-permit-scheme/) .

###  Pay

You must be paid at least the [ National Minimum Wage
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/minimum-
wage/) .

###  Eligible jobs

The Reactivation Employment Permit is available for all occupations, except
domestic jobs (other than [ certain carers ](https://dbei.gov.ie/en/What-We-
Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/Employment-Permit-
Eligibility/Carers-in-private-homes/) ).

###  Job offer

You must have a genuine job offer and have the qualifications, skills and
experience required for the job. You must be directly employed and paid by
your employer. The employer must be trading in Ireland, registered with
Revenue and, if applicable, with the Companies Registration Office.

A Reactivation Employment Permit will not be issued to companies where more
than 50% of the employees are non-EEA nationals. This is called the [ 50:50
rule ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/work-
permits#l63301) .

[ Labour Market Needs Test ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-
permits/work-permits#l27fdb)

is not required.

##  How to apply

To get a Reactivation Employment Permit, you must first apply for temporary
immigration permission with ISD. Once your temporary immigration permission is
approved you can apply for a Reactivation Employment Permit.

###  Apply for a temporary immigration permission

To apply for temporary immigration permission, you must have a current job
offer.

You need to complete the [ REP application form
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-
ireland/reactivation-employment-permit-scheme/#submit-application) and [
submit it to ISD. ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/reactivation-employment-permit-scheme/#submit-
application) There are [ REP guidelines ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-
situation-has-changed-since-i-arrived-in-ireland/reactivation-employment-
permit-scheme/) to help you with this form. ISD will assess the application
and if you qualify for temporary immigration permission, you get stamp 1
permission for 4 months. You must register this permission at your local
registration office.

###  Apply for a Reactivation Employment Permit

You apply for a Reactivation Employment Permit to the Employment Permits
Section of the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment (DETE) using the
[ Employment Permits Online System (EPOS)
](https://epos.djei.ie/EPOSOnlineportal#/app/welcome) . Your prospective
employer can apply on your behalf or you can apply yourself. You must provide
the supporting documentation required.

###  After you have applied

You can check the status of your application using the [ online status enquiry
facility ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-
Skills/Employment-Permits/Employment-Permit-Status-Form/) . The [ application
processing times ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-
Skills/Employment-Permits/Current-Application-Processing-Dates/) are on the
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment’s website.

If your application is refused you must be given the reasons it was refused.
You can appeal this decision within 28 days, using the [ review of decision to
refuse an employment permit form
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/publications/submission-of-a-decision-for-
review-under-section-13-or-17-of-the-employment-permits-act-2006-as-
amended-.html) .

##  Your family

People who have a Reactivation Employment Permit can bring their family to
live with them in Ireland after 1 year has passed since the permit was issued.
You have to show that you can support them, by earning more than the [ limits
for Working Family Payment. ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-to-families-and-children/family-income-
supplement#l2b73a)

**Family are from a country whose citizens need a visa to enter Ireland** :
they must all apply for separate visas.

**Family are from a country whose citizens do not need a visa to enter
Ireland** : they must show proof that they are the family members of a General
Employment Permit holder to an immigration officer in the airport or port
where they enter Ireland.

You can read more about [ employment permits and family members ](/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/spousal-work-permit-scheme/) .

##  Changing or losing your job

###  Changing your job

If this is your first Reactivation Employment Permit, you must stay with your
new employer for 12 months (except in exceptional circumstances). After that,
you can move to a new employer if you make a new application for an employment
permit.

###  Losing your job

If you are made redundant you should [ notify the Department of Enterprise,
Trade and Employment ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/publications/notification-
of-dismissal-by-reason-of-redundancy-under-sections-20a-20b-of-the-employment-
permits-act-2006-as-amended-.html) . The Department will allow you 6 months to
find another job. When you find another job you will be issued with a new
Reactivation Employment Permit.

You must contact your local immigration registration office to confirm your
immigration status. If you have more than 6 months before your immigration
permission expires, you can reside in Ireland for 6 months. If you have less
than 6 months' immigration permission you can have your immigration permission
extended to 6 months which means you will have to pay for a new IRP. If you
have not found a new job after 6 months you may have to leave Ireland.

If you then get an offer of employment in Ireland, you can [ apply for a new
employment permit ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/my-situation-has-changed-
since-i-arrived-in-ireland/reactivation-employment-permit-scheme/) .

##  Fees

The fees for Reactivation Employment Permits are:

**New applications** Duration of permit  |  Amount   
---|---  
Up to 6 months  |  €500   
Up to 2 years  |  €1,000   
**Renewals** Duration of permit  |  Amount   
---|---  
Up to 6 months  |  €750   
Up to 3 years  |  €1,500   
  
If an application is refused, 90% of the fee will be refunded to the
applicant.

The fee for the Irish Residence Permit Certificate of Registration is €300.

**Renewals**

An employer or an employee can apply to renew the Reactivation Employment
Permit using the [ Employment Permits Online System (EPOS)
](https://epos.djei.ie/EPOSOnlineportal#/app/welcome) 16 weeks before the
expiry of the existing permit.

**Registration**

When you are issued with your Reactivation Employment Permit you need to
register with your [ local immigration office
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/registering-your-immigration-permission/how-
to-register-your-immigration-permission-for-the-first-time/) . You must do
this to get permission to remain in the State as an employee. It is important
to do this as otherwise you will not have the correct immigration status.

There is further information about [ Reactivation Employment Permits
](https://dbei.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-
Permits/Permit-Types/Reactivation-Employment-Permit/) on the Department's
website.

##  Further information

###  Department of Justice

Immigration Service Delivery  
13/14 Burgh Quay  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ https://www.irishimmigration.ie/
](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/)

###  Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment

Employment Permits Section

Earlsfort Centre  
Lower Hatch Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 PW01  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Helpline only: Monday to Friday 9:30am - 5pm

**Tel:** +353 1 417 5333

**Locall:** 0818 808 090

**Fax:** +353 1 631 3268

**Homepage:** [ https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-Do/Workplace-and-
Skills/Employment-Permits/ ](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/What-We-
Do/Workplace-and-Skills/Employment-Permits/)

**Contact Form:** [ https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/what-we-do/workplace-and-
skills/employment-permits/employment-permit-status-form/
](https://enterprise.gov.ie/en/what-we-do/workplace-and-skills/employment-
permits/employment-permit-status-form/)

**Email:** [ employmentpermits@enterprise.gov.ie
](mailto:employmentpermits@enterprise.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 16 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/reactivation-employment-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Reactivation%20Employment%20Permit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/reactivation-employment-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/reactivation-employment-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Reactivation%20Employment%20Permit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/reactivation-employment-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Types of employment permits_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/overview-employment-permits/)

Under the Employment Permits (Amendment) Act 2014 there are 9 types of
employment permit. Find out more about the different types of permit.

2126.3027

  * [ _General Employment Permit_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/work-permits/)

Find out about General Employment Permits, who may apply and when a person
with an employment permit may change jobs.

1996.7426

  * [ _Employment permits and family members_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/employment-permits/spousal-work-permit-scheme/)

Information about which emloyment permit holders are allowed to bring their
family to Ireland, and how those family members can apply to live and work.

1974.8256

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

