**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Planning your journey home ](/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-
your-journey-home/) > Bringing your vehicle to Ireland

#  Bringing your vehicle to Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Do I have to pay tax when I bring my vehicle to Ireland? 
  * Bringing your vehicle to Ireland from an EU country 
  * Bringing your vehicle to Ireland from outside the EU 
  * Register your vehicle with NCTS 
  * Bringing my vehicle on a visit to Ireland 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you’re moving to Ireland, you may want to bring your car or other vehicle
with you.

You may be eligible for tax relief on your vehicle if you are moving to
Ireland permanently. A separate relief is also available for [ businesses that
transfer back equipment like vehicles to Ireland
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/customs/individuals/transfer-business/index.aspx)
.

This page is a guide to claiming tax relief on a vehicle you already own. If
you are buying a vehicle from abroad and importing it into Ireland, read our
page on [ importing a car to Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/importing-car-into-ireland/) .

##  Do I have to pay tax when I bring my vehicle to Ireland?

The type of tax you are liable to pay depends on if you are moving from an EU
or non-EU country.

###  **Moving from within the EU**

If you are bringing your vehicle from another EU country into Ireland, you are
liable to pay:

  * [ Motor tax ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-insurance/motor-tax-rates/)
  * Value Added Tax (VAT) 
  * Vehicle Registration Tax (VRT) 

You can apply to be exempt from VAT and VRT, if you and your vehicle meet
certain requirements – see information on VAT and VRT relief below.

###  **Moving from outside the EU**

If you are bringing your vehicle from outside the EU to Ireland, you are
liable to pay:

  * Customs duty 
  * [ Motor tax ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-insurance/motor-tax-rates/)
  * Value Added Tax (VAT) 
  * Vehicle Registration Tax (VRT) 

You will also need to [ register the vehicle
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vrt/vehicle-registration-tax/general-information-
on-registration.aspx) and get [ motor insurance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-
tax-and-insurance/motor-insurance/) .

You can apply to be exempt from VAT and VRT, if you and your vehicle meet
certain requirements – see information on VAT and VRT relief below.

##  Bringing your vehicle to Ireland from an EU country

If you are bringing your vehicle to Ireland from an EU country, you are liable
to pay VAT and VRT.

This section explains how to claim relief from VAT and VRT when moving to
Ireland from an EU country.

###  **Who qualifies for VAT relief?**

You qualify for VAT relief if you meet all of the following conditions:

  * You have owned the vehicle for at least 6 months before moving to Ireland 
  * You have lived in another EU country for a continuous period of at least 12 months 
  * The vehicle has driven over 6,000 kilometres 
  * The required tax and duty is paid on the vehicle 

You must import your vehicle within one year of moving to Ireland to claim the
relief.

####  **How to claim VAT relief**

To claim the VAT exemption, you must provide [ documents that prove the above
conditions and that you have lived abroad
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/customs/individuals/transfer-
residence/documents.aspx) . These documents should accompany your completed [
VRT Transfer of Residence from Within the EU Form (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vrt/documents/vrt/form-vrt-tor.pdf) .

###  **Who qualifies for VRT relief?**

To claim an exemption from VRT, you must have had your normal residence
outside Ireland at least 185 days per year before moving to Ireland.

You must also:

  * Own the vehicle 
  * Have owned and used the vehicle outside of Ireland for at least 6 months before moving to Ireland 
  * Make sure the required tax and duty is paid on the vehicle 
  * Import your vehicle within one year of moving to Ireland 

You must import your vehicle within one year of moving to Ireland to claim the
relief.

You are not eligible for VRT relief if you were granted similar relief for a
vehicle in the last 5 years.

####  **How to claim VRT relief when arriving from an EU country**

Send a completed [ VRT Transfer of Residence from Within the EU Form (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vrt/documents/vrt/form-vrt-tor.pdf) to the
National VRT Service through [ MyEnquiries on the Revenue website
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/manage-your-
record/myenquiries.aspx) .

If you are not able to submit your VRT exemption application using Revenue
online, send your application to:

**Revenue Commissioners**

National VRT Services  
Revenue Commissioners  
Anne Street  
Wexford  
Y35 E29K  
Ireland

You must apply for VRT relief within 7 days of the vehicle arriving in
Ireland.

Send the following with your application:

  * Proof of car ownership for 6 months or more 
  * Evidence you lived abroad, such as bank statements, proof of address and date of arrival in Ireland 
  * Proof of car insurance abroad 
  * Proof of date of car purchase 

Your application will normally be processed within 10 working days and if
approved, you will get a letter confirming eligibility. You must bring this
letter to the National Car Testing Service (NCTS) when [ registering the
vehicle to claim the exemption ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/importing-car-into-
ireland#lf752b) .

##  Bringing your vehicle to Ireland from outside the EU

If you are bringing your car to Ireland from outside the EU, you are liable to
pay customs duty, VAT and VRT.

This section explains how to claim relief from customs duty, VAT, and VRT when
moving from a non-EU country to Ireland. This is also known as [ transfer of
residence relief ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/customs/individuals/transfer-
residence/index.aspx) .

###  **Who can claim relief from customs duty, VAT and VRT?**

You can claim relief from customs duty, VAT, and VRT if you:

  * Are moving to Ireland permanently 
  * Are the owner of the vehicle at the time of moving to Ireland 
  * Have owned and used the vehicle outside of Ireland for at least 6 months before arrival in Ireland 
  * Have paid the required tax and duties in the country it was bought 

For VRT relief, you must meet all the above and have lived outside Ireland for
at least 185 days per year before moving to Ireland.

For VAT and customs duty relief, you must meet all the above and have lived
outside the EU for a continuous period of 12 months.

####  **How to apply for tax and duty relief when coming from a non-EU
country**

To apply, complete a [ Transfer of Residence from Non-EU Country Form (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/customs/individuals/customs/c-and-e-1076.pdf) and
email it to Revenue at least 2 weeks before your vehicle arrives in Ireland.
You must include documents to support your application such as:

  * The car’s logbook 
  * Proof of ownership 
  * Certificate of insurance and 
  * Evidence it was previously used abroad 

If you are bringing your vehicle by ferry from the UK, you should also ask for
a Pre-Boarding Notification ID.

Email the completed form to one of the following addresses, depending on the
area your vehicle is arriving:

**Port of entry** |  **Email**  
---|---  
Cork Port  |  [ TORSCorkPort@revenue.ie ](mailto:TORSCorkPort@revenue.ie)  
Cork Airport  |  [ TORSCorkAirport@revenue.ie ](mailto:TORSCorkAirport@revenue.ie)  
Dublin Port  |  [ TORSDublinPort@revenue.ie ](mailto:TORSDublinPort@revenue.ie)  
Dublin Airport  |  [ TORSDublinAirport@revenue.ie ](mailto:TORSDublinAirport@revenue.ie)  
Rosslare  |  [ TORSRosslarePort@revenue.ie ](mailto:TORSRosslarePort@revenue.ie)  
Shannon Airport  |  [ TORSShannonAirport@revenue.ie ](mailto:TORSShannonAirport@revenue.ie)  
  
After your Transfer of Residence (TOR) application is submitted, and if you
are eligible for the relief, Revenue will send you a unique TOR number.

###  Arriving at customs in Ireland

When you are entering Ireland, present your documents, including your Transfer
of Residence form and unique TOR number to customs.

If you are importing the vehicle using a shipping company, the shipping
company should arrange the customs declaration and present the required
documents to customs when they arrive in Ireland.

If approved for transfer of residence relief, Revenue will issue you a letter
confirming this. You need to bring this letter with you when you [ register
your car with the National Car Testing Service ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/importing-car-into-ireland#lf752b) .

###  Bringing a vehicle from Northern Ireland

If you are moving to Ireland from Northern Ireland, you must still register
your car and pay VRT unless exempt. Revenue has further information if you are
[ importing a vehicle from Northern Ireland
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vrt/registration-of-imported-used-
vehicles/vehicles-no-declaration-ni.aspx) .

##  Register your vehicle with NCTS

When your vehicle arrives in Ireland, you must contact a National Car Testing
Service (NCTS) within 7 days to [ make a VRT appointment
](https://www.ncts.ie/vrt-home/) . Your appointment date should be within 30
days of bringing your vehicle into Ireland.

The NCTS carry out a VRT inspection on behalf of Revenue. You must bring your
VRT exemption letter to this appointment.

##  Bringing my vehicle on a visit to Ireland

If you are visiting Ireland on a temporary stay, you do not have to register
your vehicle or pay VRT if you meet certain conditions.

Find information about [ Foreign Registered Vehicles Temporary Exemptions on
Revenue’s website. ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/guide-to-vrt/reliefs-and-exemptions/temporary-exemption.aspx)

##  Further information

Revenue has published a [ guide to reliefs and exemptions (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/vehicle-registration-
tax/vrt-manual-section-02.pdf) . If you have a query about the transfer of
residence relief or other tax exemptions, find [ Revenue contact details on
revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) .

You can find more information about:

  * [ Shipping your belongings home ](/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/shipping-your-belongings-back-to-ireland/)
  * [ Importing a vehicle into Ireland ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/importing-car-into-ireland/)

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 21 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/bringing-your-vehicle-back-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Bringing%20your%20vehicle%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/bringing-your-vehicle-back-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/planning-your-journey-home/bringing-your-vehicle-back-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Bringing%20your%20vehicle%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/bringing-your-vehicle-back-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Bringing your non-EEA de facto partner home to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-de-facto-partner/)

A step-by-step guide to the immigration process for your non-EEA de facto
partner. Outlines the process for bringing your de facto partner who is not
from the EEA, the EU, the UK or Switzerland, home to Ireland to live and work.

1894.5818

  * [ _Bringing your non-EEA spouse or civil partner home to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-non-eea-spouse/)

A step-by-step guide to the immigration process for your non-EEA spouse or
civil partner. Outlines the process for bringing your spouse or civil partner
who is not from the EEA, the EU, the UK or Switzerland, home to Ireland to
live and work.

1856.9207

  * [ _Bringing my non-EEA partner to Ireland to get married_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/bringing-my-non-eea-partner-to-ireland-to-get-married/)

Outlines how to bring your non-EEA, UK or Swiss partner to Ireland to get
married.

1650.9465

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

