**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Setting up a business ](/en/returning-to-ireland/setting-up-a-
business/) > Starting a business when you return to Ireland

#  Starting a business when you return to Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * The ‘Back for Business’ programme 
  * Your guide to starting a business in Ireland 
  * Financial considerations 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

If you are returning to Ireland after living abroad, you may decide to work
for yourself, rather than for an employer. Your knowledge and skills gained
from life abroad can help you to succeed in the local economy.

This page has information on how to become a business-owner in Ireland,
including guidance on how to write a business plan, hire staff, and manage
your taxes.

If a non-Irish citizen is coming to Ireland to set up a business with you,
they may need to apply for permission first. Read about [ coming to set up a
business in Ireland as a non-EEA, UK or Swiss national
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-ireland/#lac4a4) .

##  The ‘Back for Business’ programme

Back for Business is a free development programme to help Irish citizens who
have returned to Ireland to develop a business. The programme is funded
through the [ Emigrant Support Programme ](https://www.dfa.ie/global-
irish/support-overseas/emigrant-support-programme/) by the Department of
Foreign Affairs.

Visit our page about [ the Back for Business programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/setting-up-a-
business/back-for-business-programme/) .

##  Your guide to starting a business in Ireland

Whether you ran a business while living abroad, or you are becoming an
entrepreneur for the first time, you can read the following information about
starting a business in Ireland:

  * [ Step-by-step guide to setting up a business in Ireland ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/step-by-step-guide-to-setting-up-a-business-in-ireland/)
  * [ How to write a business plan ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/how-to-write-a-business-plan/)
  * [ Registering your business name ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/becoming-self-employed/#ad8994)
  * [ Deciding on the legal structure of your business ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/#9960e7)

##  Financial considerations

You must consider a range of financial issues before you start a business. For
example, your tax responsibilities will change. You might also need a start-up
grant or want to hire employees.

Read our information on:

  * [ How to get funding ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/#6c48a3)
  * [ What to do if you have credit difficulties ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/starting-a-business/#d9e9f0)
  * [ Understanding your tax as a business owner ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/understanding-your-tax-as-a-business-owner/)
  * [ Employing people in your business ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/employing-people-in-your-business/)
  * [ Getting insurance or planning permission ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/becoming-self-employed/#54b49d)

##  More information

You can [ find the representative body for your specific industry
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-
employment/finding-information-on-starting-business/#8b20a5) for tailored
guidance and support.

If sustainability is important to you, see the [ range of supports available
to make your business eco-friendly
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-
employment/supports-for-businesses-going-green/) .

See our [ list of websites, Government departments and agencies with
information to help you start a business
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-
employment/finding-information-on-starting-business/#969d1a) in Ireland.

You can also contact the following organisations for guidance:

###  Enterprise Ireland

Enterprise Ireland,  
East Point Business Park  
The Plaza  
Dublin 3  
D03 E5R6

**Tel:** 01 727 2000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.enterprise-ireland.com/ ](http://www.enterprise-
ireland.com/)

**Contact Form:** [ https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/contact-us
](https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/contact-us)

**Email:** [ client.service@enterprise-ireland.com
](mailto:client.service@enterprise-ireland.com)

###  Companies Registration Office

Bloom House,  
Gloucester Place Lower,  
Dublin 1,  
D01 C8P4

**Opening Hours:** 10am to 12:30pm and 2:30pm to 4pm, Monday-Friday

**Tel:** (01) 804 5200

**Locall:** 0818 452 000

**Fax:** (01) 804 5222

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cro.ie ](http://www.cro.ie)

**Email:** [ cro.info@enterprise.gov.ie ](mailto:cro.info@enterprise.gov.ie)

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 6 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/setting-up-a-business/starting-a-business-when-you-return-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Starting%20a%20business%20when%20you%20return%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/setting-up-a-business/starting-a-business-when-you-return-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/setting-up-a-business/starting-a-business-when-you-return-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Starting%20a%20business%20when%20you%20return%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/setting-up-a-business/starting-a-business-when-you-return-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Getting around when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to get around when you return to Ireland,
including public transport services, taxis, car rental, driving licences, tram
services and more.

2814.0986

  * [ _Accessing education when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/accessing-the-education-system-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

This page includes information on accessing education when you return to
Ireland. It covers free pre-school education, enrolling in primary or
secondary school, third level fees, the student grant and more.

2733.0476

  * [ _Managing your money when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-finances/organising-your-finances-on-your-return/)

This page has information on organising your finances when you return to
Ireland, including transfer of pensions and social insurance and benefits from
abroad.

2721.5142

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

