**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > Getting around in Ireland

#  Getting around in Ireland

  * Overview 

[ Getting around when you return to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-return-to-ireland/)

This page has information on how to get around when you return to Ireland,
including public transport services, taxis, car rental, driving licences, tram
services and more.

  * [ Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)

Information on buying car insurance after you return to Ireland, how to use
your claims free driving experience from abroad and what to do if you are
refused insurance cover.

  * [ Foreign driving licences in Ireland ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-permit/)

How to exchange a driving licence issued in another country for an Irish
driving licence, including information on the fees and a list of recognised
exchange countries.

**This document is in:** [ Driver licensing ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/)

  * [ Taxsaver Commuter Ticket Scheme ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/public-transport-commuter-tickets-and-tax/)

The TaxSaver Commuter Ticket Scheme, which involves employers providing
employees with bus and rail commuter tickets, allows employees to benefit from
reduced tax, PRSI and USC payments and for employers to benefit from reduced
PRSI payments.

**This document is in:** [ Public transport ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/)

  * [ Bus services ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/bus-services-in-ireland/)

Public bus transport services offer services on a wide range of routes
throughout the country.

**This document is in:** [ Public transport ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/)

  * [ Rail services ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/rail-services-in-ireland/)

Public transport rail services are operated by Iarnrod Eireann, a State
company. Information about services, routes, fares and accessibility.

**This document is in:** [ Public transport ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/)

  * [ Luas tram system ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/luas/)

Information on the Luas Light Rail Transit system.

**This document is in:** [ Public transport ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/)

  * [ Steps to learning to drive ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/learning-to-drive/)

A step by step guide to learning to drive, from passing your theory test to
getting your full driving licence.

**This document is in:** [ Driver licensing ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/)

###  Most Read in "Getting around in Ireland"

  1. [ Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)
  2. [ Getting around when you return to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-return-to-ireland/)

