**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > Returning to Ireland

#  Returning to Ireland

  * Explore the Returning to Ireland portal 
  * Can't find what you're looking for? 

Are you an Irish citizen living abroad and thinking about moving home?

Irish emigrants return to Ireland for many reasons. You may be coming back to
work, or to retire. You may have children and want them to grow up closer to
family, or maybe you’re moving home to care for a family member.

Whatever your reason for returning to Ireland and whatever stage of life
you’re at, we have the information you need to plan your journey.

The Returning to Ireland portal on [ citizensinformation.ie
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/) is funded by the [ Department of
Foreign Affairs ](https://www.dfa.ie/global-irish/returning-to-ireland/) . You
can explore the portal using the links below.

##  Explore the Returning to Ireland portal

###  [ **Planning your journey home**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-your-
journey-home/)

Practical information for planning your journey home, including bringing your
belongings and pets, importing a vehicle, authenticating documents, and
customs charges.

###  [ **Residency and citizenship**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-
citizenship/)

Includes information about citizenship, getting passports for children born
abroad, and bringing your non-EEA spouse or partner to Ireland with you.

###  [ Finding somewhere to live when you return to Ireland
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-
to-live/)

Information on social housing supports, how to find a home to rent, rent
regulations, getting a mortgage and buying property, and schemes to improve an
existing property.

###  [ **Retiring in Ireland**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/retiring-to-
ireland/)

Information for people planning to retire in Ireland, including entitlement to
Irish State pensions, housing for older people, free travel, and the Nursing
Home Support Scheme (Fair Deal Scheme).

###  [ **Organising your finances**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-
finances/)

Information on opening a bank account, the tax system in Ireland, taking out a
loan, credit history, and insurance policies.

###  [ Applying for social welfare when you return to Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-
social-welfare/)

Outlines how the social welfare system works in Ireland, what supports are
available, residence requirements and how to apply for support if you need it.

###  [ **Starting work** ](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/starting-work/)

Includes recognition of your foreign education and training qualifications,
contracts of employment, paying income tax and understanding your employment
rights in Ireland.

###  [ Setting up a business in Ireland
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/setting-up-a-
business/)

Information on starting a business in Ireland, hiring staff, becoming self-
employed, and supports for small business owners.

###  [ **Looking after your health**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-
your-health/)

Outlines the Irish health system and how it works, your entitlement to public
healthcare, getting private health insurance, and access to healthcare for
visitors.

###  [ **Getting around in Ireland**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-
ireland/)

Includes buying a car, converting your foreign driving licence to an Irish
licence, getting car insurance, and using the public transport network.

###  [ Coming home to Ireland with children
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-
children/)

Includes having a baby in Ireland, your childcare options, getting a PPS
number for your children, and social welfare payments for families and
children.

###  [ **Education and schooling**
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-
schooling/)

Information on early childhood education, enrolling your children in school,
getting an exemption from Irish, and fees for third-level education.

##  Can't find what you're looking for?

If you can’t find what you are looking for, or if you have suggestions on what
we can do better, please let us know. Email [ returning2ireland@ciboard.ie
](mailto:returning2ireland@ciboard.ie) .

_**Page edited:** 24 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/overview-of-returning-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Returning%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/overview-of-returning-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/overview-of-returning-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Returning%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/overview-of-returning-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

1521.1593

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and having a baby_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-baby/)

Outlines what public maternity care services you can access when you return to
Ireland and your entitlements to take leave from work when you have a baby.

1475.292

  * [ _Returning home to Ireland to retire_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/retiring-to-ireland/retiring-to-ireland-as-a-returning-irish-emigrant/)

This page has information on housing, social welfare, pensions, work and tax
for returning Irish emigrants who want to retire in Ireland.

1463.6422

  * [ _Planning your journey home to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/planning-your-journey-home/)

This page has information to consider when planning your journey home to
Ireland.

1463.6194

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

