**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Coming home from another country ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/country-specific-information/) > Returning to Ireland from the United
Kingdom

#  Returning to Ireland from the United Kingdom

  * Introduction 
  * Opening a bank account 
  * Your PPS number and applying for benefits 
  * Getting your UK benefits in Ireland 
  * Housing in Ireland 
  * Healthcare in Ireland 
  * Education in Ireland 
  * Finding work 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Before returning to Ireland from the United Kingdom (UK), you may have some
questions. For example, you might be wondering about tax in Ireland, getting
your pension, or other social welfare benefits.

This page covers key things to know when coming back to Ireland from the UK
and how you can plan your journey home.

##  Opening a bank account

Before you [ open a bank account in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/opening-a-bank-account/) , you must show both:

  * [ Proof of identity ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/financial-institutions-and-identification/) (such as a valid passport or driving licence) 
  * Proof of address (such as a recent utility bill). 

In general, this means you can’t open an Irish bank account until you have
arrived home. See ‘Non-resident bank accounts below’ for more details.

As it may take some time to establish proof of address in Ireland, you can
continue using your UK bank account in Ireland. The UK is still part of the
Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), which means you can use the IBAN from your
UK bank account for payments and transfers in euro.

For example, your Irish employer can pay wages into your UK account, and you
can set up direct debits with utility companies using your UK account.

Learn more on our page about [ using your UK bank account in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-
finances/banking-and-returning-to-ireland/#219206) .

**Non-resident bank accounts**

Some banks in Ireland offer ‘non-resident’ accounts. This means you may be
able to set up an Irish bank account before you return home.

You still need to prove your identity (this requirement is set out in [ anti-
money laundering legislation ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/money-laundering-in-ireland/) ), but the bank
may, for example, accept a foreign utility bill if it has been certified by a
solicitor or police officer.

Different banks have their own requirements, so you should contact your
preferred bank directly for advice.

##  Your PPS number and applying for benefits

When you return to Ireland, you will need a [ Personal Public Service (PPS)
number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/) to access social
welfare benefits and many public services.

You may already have a PPS number if you:

  * Were born in Ireland from 1971 onwards 
  * Started work in Ireland after 1979 
  * Are getting an Irish social welfare payment 

Regardless of how long you’ve lived in the UK, your old PPS number is still
valid. You don’t need to apply for a new one.

If you [ can’t remember your PPS number
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-
social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-and-families/#90c63a)
, contact the Department of Social Protection.

If you have never had one before, see which [ documents you need to apply for
a PPS number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-
and-families/#e98839) .

###  **Applying online for a PPS number**

You can [ fill in your application for a PPS number online using MyWelfare.ie
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/identity-services/personal-public-
service-pps-number/) if you are living in Ireland and you are at least 18
years of age. **You will need to attend an in-person appointment to complete
your application.**

When you apply online, you will need to upload:

  * Proof of why you need a PPS number 
  * Proof of your address 
  * A copy of your photo identity document (passport, driving licence, ID card, etc.) If you do not have valid documents, you should provide whatever ID documents that you do have. 

The documents you upload need to be clear and easy for someone to read.

###  **Applying for benefits**

In Ireland, the Department of Social Protection provides social welfare
benefits. Even though you are an Irish citizen, you must meet the [ habitual
residence condition (HRC) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/habitual-residence-condition/) to
qualify for certain payments, including [ Child Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/child-benefit/) and the [ State Pension (non-contributory)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-non-contributory/) .

This means you must be able to prove a close link to Ireland and show that you
plan to continue living here for the foreseeable future.

When deciding if you are habitually resident, the Department will consider:

  * How long you have lived in Ireland or any other country 
  * The reason you lived abroad 
  * The nature and pattern of your employment 
  * Actions taken that demonstrate you intend to stay in Ireland for more than a short period and establish lasting ties in the State 
  * Your plans to live in Ireland for the foreseeable future, according to the evidence provided 

Find out [ how to meet the habitual residence condition
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-
social-welfare/habitual-residence-condition/#601334) .

##  Getting your UK benefits in Ireland

Many UK benefits, including national insurance pensions, can continue to be
paid to you by the UK Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) if you move from
the UK to Ireland.

Before you move, you should ask if you can transfer your existing UK benefits
outside the UK.

Contact the [ DWP’s International Pension Centre
](https://www.gov.uk/international-pension-centre) for more information.

###  **Claiming your UK state pension from Ireland**

If you worked in the UK and paid enough national insurance contributions, you
may qualify for the UK state pension. You can claim your UK state pension even
if you have moved back to Ireland.

You must choose whether you want your pension paid into a UK or [ Irish bank
account ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/organising-your-finances/banking-and-returning-to-ireland/) .

Contact the [ International Pension Centre
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-
information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-kingdom/) for information on
how to claim your pension from abroad.

You can also visit gov.uk for information on [ claiming your state pension
when you retire abroad ](https://www.gov.uk/state-pension-if-you-retire-
abroad) .

###  **Transfer a private pension from the UK to Ireland**

You can transfer your UK pension to Ireland if it is listed as a ‘Qualifying
Recognised Overseas Pension Scheme’ (QROPS). Your request for the transfer may
be assessed for tax purposes by the scheme administrator and by the UK’s tax
authorities.

The UK has a [ list of recognised Irish overseas pension schemes
](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/check-the-recognised-overseas-pension-schemes-
notification-list) .

If the scheme to which you are considering transferring your pension savings
is not a QROPS:

  * Your UK pension scheme may refuse to make the transfer, or 
  * You may have to pay at least 40% tax on the transfer. 

[ Find out more about overseas pension transfers, including details about
applications and taxes ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/habitual-residence-condition/) .

##  Housing in Ireland

###  **Buying a home**

If you plan to buy a home, there are several steps in the process. Before you
decide to buy, make sure you’ve done the following:

####  **Find out what you can afford**

Review your budget to determine how much you can afford in monthly mortgage
repayments. You should make sure you have enough to cover all the [ costs
involved in buying a home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/costs-of-buying-a-home/) , for example:

  * Mortgage costs 
  * Legal fees 
  * Insurance 
  * Stamp duty 

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has a [ budget
planner ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/budget-planner/)
you can use to see how much you can afford each month.

####  **Get a solicitor**

While looking for a property, you should hire a solicitor to do the
_conveyancing_ . Conveyancing is the legal work involved in buying or selling
property.

Conveyancing charges can vary between solicitors, so it is worth contacting
several to compare prices. You can use the [ Law Society’s website
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/) to find a
solicitor in your area.

####  **Get mortgage approval**

A [ mortgage ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) is a long-term loan
secured against the property you buy. This means if you don’t repay your
mortgage, you may lose your home.

Commercial lenders (banks) offer a range of mortgage rates and products.
Before starting to look for a home, you should check with potential lenders to
get a statement of how much they are prepared to lend you. This is called
_approval in principle_ . Getting approval in principle will indicate what
price range you can consider when looking for somewhere to buy.

Approval in principle doesn’t mean that the lender has approved a mortgage and
agreed to lend you this amount. The official mortgage approval is contained in
a _letter of offer_ , which the lender will only issue when it is fully
satisfied with certain matters, including a valuation of the property you are
buying.

The CCPC has a [ mortgage calculator ](https://www.gov.uk/international-
pension-centre) that shows what your monthly repayments will be depending on:

  * The amount you borrow 
  * How long the mortgage will last 
  * The interest rate 

[ You can find more information on mortgages
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/mortgages/) from the CCPC.

###  **Renting**

Most rooms, flats, apartments, and houses to rent are advertised on
accommodation websites.

You may also find accommodation you can rent:

  * In the accommodation sections of newspapers 
  * In advertisements in shops 
  * On college notice boards 
  * At your student union, many of which keep accommodation lists 
  * By word of mouth 
  * By seeing 'To Let' signs on properties 
  * Through social media pages dedicated to finding and renting accommodation 
  * By using an accommodation or letting agency 

**What are letting agencies?**

Letting agencies (sometimes called ‘accommodation agencies’) are commercial
organisations that help you find places to rent. They may charge a fee. Before
registering with an agency, you should find out:

  * Is the agency licensed? 
  * What services does it offer? 
  * If you pay a fee, in what circumstances will you get a refund? 
  * If you decide to register with the agency, make sure you get a receipt for any money you pay. 

Consider these questions when viewing places to rent:

  * How much can you afford in rent and bills? 
  * What is the standard of the accommodation? 
  * What is the [ Building Energy Rating (BER) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/) of the property? 
  * Where is the property located? Is it near your work or college? 
  * How long do you plan to stay there? 
  * Do you want to share a bedroom, bathroom, or kitchen? 

Find more information about [ looking for a flat or house to rent
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/budget-planner/) .

##  Healthcare in Ireland

Public health services in Ireland are provided by the [ Health Service
Executive (HSE) ](https://www.gov.uk/transferring-your-pension/transferring-
to-an-overseas-pension-scheme) .

You are entitled to public health services free of charge or at a reduced cost
if:

  * You have been living in Ireland for at least a year 
  * You plan to live here for at least a year 

This is called being ‘ordinarily resident’ in Ireland.

You may have to pay for some health services in Ireland that you accessed in
the UK for free. For example, people in Ireland generally pay a fee for GP
appointments. However, you may be able to attend your GP for free if you
qualify for a [ medical card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) or [ GP visit card ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-
and-calculators/mortgage-calculators/mortgage-calculator/) .

Find more information about [ how to find a GP in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/gp-and-
hospital-services/gps-and-private-patients/#5e0457) and [ accessing health
services when you return to Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-
your-health/accessing-healthcare-on-your-return-to-ireland/) .

##  Education in Ireland

###  **Primary and post-primary education**

There are 2 types of primary schools in Ireland:

  1. National primary schools (often called ‘national schools’) are funded by the State and do not charge fees 
  2. Private primary schools, which charge fees. 

Most children in Ireland go to a State-funded national primary school.

Children usually start post-primary school when they are 12 or 13 years of
age. Most children attend State-funded post-primary schools which do not
charge a fee.

Read about the [ types of post-primary schools in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-school/#6620d4) .

####  **Finding a school**

To find a school, you can search primary and post-primary schools by type and
area using the Department of Education’s [ Find a School tool
](https://www.education.ie/en/Find-a-School/) .

You can filter your search results by ethos, language of instruction, and
gender. You will see a map showing schools that meet your selection.

Most schools have a website with information about their ethos, policies,
curriculum, and extra-curricular activities on offer. You can also contact a
school directly for more information.

####  **Applying to a school**

You should apply to the school in writing. If they don’t have an application
form, you can apply by letter or email.

All schools must publish an admissions notice and an admissions policy.

The **admissions notice** tells you:

  * When the school will start accepting applications for the year (when to apply) 
  * When you will get the decision on your application 
  * When you must accept a place 

The **admissions policy** describes the rules the school will follow for
selecting students and how they make their decisions. It also states what
happens if the school has no space for new students (sometimes referred to as
'over-subscribed').

###  **Higher and further education**

A wide range of institutions in Ireland provide third-level education,
(usually called ‘higher education’ or ‘further education’).

If you are thinking of [ going to college
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/looking-for-a-
flat-or-house-to-rent/) , you can search the [ Qualifax website
](http://www.qualifax.ie/) for details of courses. Generally, applications for
undergraduate courses in Ireland are made through the [ Central Applications
Office (CAO). ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-
Search/) You can find more information in our pages on:

  * [ Application procedures and entry requirements ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
  * [ Third-level fees ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/)
  * [ Tax relief for third-level fees ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)

If you think you might qualify for a grant, you can learn more about:

  * [ Maintenance grant schemes for students on third-level courses ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/)
  * [ Grants and funds available for mature students ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-students/) . 

##  Finding work

You can check our [ list of sources where job opportunities are regularly
posted ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/starting-work-and-
changing-job/training-and-looking-for-work/finding-and-getting-a-job/#592414)
.

###  **Applying for jobs**

When applying for a job, you usually need to give the employer your CV (
_curriculum vitae_ ) or complete an online application form.

If you are unemployed, [ your local employment service (LES)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/colleges-and-qualifications/going-to-college/) can help you with:

  * Your CV 
  * Job application forms 
  * Interview skills. 

You can also contact your local Youth Information Centre for help with your CV
and cover letter. [ Youth Information Centres
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/health-service-
executive/) are located all around Ireland. They offer a free, confidential
information service to people aged 12 to 25.

###  **Recognition of foreign qualifications**

You should get your foreign academic qualification recognised before applying
for jobs.

National Academic Recognition Information Centres (NARIC) can help you do this
by providing comparisons of foreign academic qualifications based on the Irish
National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ).

To compare your qualification:

  1. Search for your foreign qualification on the [ NARIC database ](http://qsearch.qqi.ie/WebPart/Search?searchtype=recognitions)
  2. Download a comparability statement 

The comparability statement will help you, your employer, or education
provider to understand your qualification in relation to the Irish education
system.

If your qualification is not listed on the NARIC database, NARIC may be able
to give you a generic comparability statement for your foreign qualification.

You can apply for recognition advice by [ submitting an online form
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-
information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-kingdom/) .

####  **More about NARIC**

NARIC has published a guide on [ how to get your foreign qualification
recognised (pdf) ](http://www.cao.ie/) . You can also find [ guides in
different languages on the website ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/the-
qualifications-system/national-academic-recognition-information-centre) .

NARIC is part of Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI), which has a [ guide
for comparing UK qualifications (pdf)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-school/) .

##  More information

Visit our [ Returning to Ireland portal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/) for more
information to plan your journey.

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 13 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
kingdom/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20from%20the%20United%20Kingdom&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
kingdom/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
kingdom/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20from%20the%20United%20Kingdom&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
kingdom/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United States of America_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-states-of-america/)

This page has information on housing, taxes, and social welfare that will help
you plan your return to Ireland from the United States. Find out what you can
do before and after you arrive in Ireland.

2876.1582

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from Canada_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-canada/)

This page can help you if you are currently living in Canada and planning to
come back to Ireland. The information focuses on areas like taxes, social
welfare, housing, and other practical considerations.

1979.9519

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and working in construction_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/returning-to-ireland-and-working-in-construction/)

Provides information on careers in construction, Safepass, certifications, and
recognition of foreign qualifications, as well as details about trade unions,
wages, and pensions for those returning to Ireland and seeking to begin or
continue work in the construction industry.

1908.8698

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

