**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Education and schooling ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-
and-schooling/) > Accessing education when you return to Ireland

#  Accessing education when you return to Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * What to do before you come home 
  * Free pre-school education in Ireland 
  * Starting primary or secondary school 
  * Education for children with special needs 
  * Returning to Ireland to study at third level 

##  Introduction

If you or your children plan to be in full time education when you return to
Ireland, you need to know about the services and supports available. This page
has information on free pre-school education, enrolling in primary or
secondary school, and special needs education.

This page also has information on third level education and apprenticeships in
Ireland.

##  What to do before you come home

###  Understand the Irish education system

The Irish education system includes [ primary school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-school/) (sometimes called
national school) and [ post-primary school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-school/)
(sometimes called secondary school). Your child must get a [ certain minimum
education from the age of 6 to 16
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-attendance/) , or until
they have completed 3 years of post-primary education.

You can enrol your child in infant classes in primary school from the age of
4, but this is not compulsory.

State-funded education is available at all levels unless you choose to send
your child to a private school. Many people continue after post-primary school
to [ further education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational_education_and_training/)
and [ third-level education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third_level_education/) .

There have been changes to the State examinations at post-primary school since
2014. The [ Junior Cycle Profile of Achievement (JCPA)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a26b9-junior-cycle-profile-of-achievement-
jcpa/) is replacing the Junior Certificate. The change includes a classroom-
based assessment based on work completed during second and third year.

Some programmes available at [ senior cycle
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/senior-cycle/) may be new to you. These
include:

  * [ Transition Year ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/transition-year/)
  * [ Leaving Certificate (also called the Established Leaving Certificate) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate/)
  * [ Leaving Certificate Applied ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-applied/)
  * [ Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-vocational-programme/)

###  Bring documents with you

It is a good idea to keep a file on your or your child's educational history.
This will help when enrolling in school or college and can help a new teacher
understand your child’s skills and needs.

The file could include the following:

  * Copies of all school reports 
  * Reference letters from teachers and/or principals 
  * A list of current textbooks and course outlines 
  * Results from standardised tests or state examinations 
  * Examples of your child’s latest classroom work, especially in maths and English 
  * Immunisation and recent medical records 

##  Free pre-school education in Ireland

[ Pre-school education ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/) is usually provided by private childcare
providers, although there are financial state supports available.

Ireland has a State-funded pre-school scheme called the [ Early Childhood Care
and Education (ECCE) Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-scheme/) . Under the scheme,
participating centres and playschools provide a free service for a set number
of hours over a set period of weeks.

Children can start ECCE when they are 2 years and 8 months and continue until
they start primary school (provided they are not older than 5 years and 6
months at the end of the pre-school year). You can [ check if your child is
eligible for ECCE. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-
school-education-and-childcare/early-childhood-care-and-education-
scheme/#72c245)

You can also apply for the [ National Childcare Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/national-childcare-scheme/) . This is a childcare subsidy for
children aged between 6 months and 15 years (children aged 15 do not qualify).

Childcare costs vary widely across Ireland and are highest in urban areas like
Dublin and Cork. Read more about [ your childcare options
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/your-childcare-options/#e30f11) .

##  Starting primary or secondary school

###  **Admissions policies in schools**

In Ireland, students usually attend their local school, but you can apply for
your child to attend any school in the country. You can use the Department of
Education’s ‘ [ Find a School’ search tool
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/find-a-school/) to find schools you are
interested in.

If there are not enough places, the school must give priority based on their [
admissions policy, as well as the published annual admissions notice
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/) . A school must
publish their admission notice before accepting any applications for a given
year, and it must be on their website. Schools are also required to make the
admission notice available to you if you request it in writing. The admission
notice must tell you the following:

  * How to get a copy of the school’s admission policy 
  * How to get an application form for admission 
  * The date when the school will start to accept applications for the year 
  * The deadline for receiving applications 
  * The date the school will inform you of their decision 
  * The date by which you must accept a place 

If a school is not over-subscribed, the school should continue to accept all
applicants, even after that deadline has passed.

The admission policy must state that the school [ will accommodate the
admission of children with a disability or other special educational needs.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/admissions-policies-in-primary-and-secondary-schools/#b3eeca)

####  **Religion and school admission**

Schools cannot use religion as a basis for admission and are not allowed to
prioritise students based on their religious beliefs. However, there are some
exceptions to this:

  * A school that provides religious instruction or education in a minority religion can prioritise a student of that religion who is looking for admission to a school that provides religious instruction or education consistent with, or similar to, their religious beliefs 
  * A school that aims to promote certain religious values can refuse to admit a student who is not of that religious denomination if it can prove the refusal is essential to maintain the ethos of the school 

####  **Paying for admission**

Most schools cannot charge fees or ask for contributions as a condition for
admission or continued admission. Exceptions to this rule include:

  * Fee-charging post-primary schools 
  * Boarding schools 
  * Schools that provide post leaving certificate courses 
  * Further education and training courses run by post-primary schools 

###  **Exemption from studying Irish**

Irish is a core subject in the national curricula for primary and secondary
schools. In limited circumstances, your child can apply to be [ excused from
learning Irish in school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/exemption-from-irish/#2a0749) , for example, if your child has lived
abroad or has a significant learning difficulty.

###  **Enrolling your child in school**

You can find information about enrolling your child in school in Ireland in
our step-by-step guides:

  * [ Enrolling your child in a primary school after returning to Ireland ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-primary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)
  * [ Enrolling your child in a secondary school after returning to Ireland ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-secondary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)

##  Education for children with special needs

If your child has [ special educational needs
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/the-irish-education-
system/special-education/) , they can attend:

  * Mainstream classes in mainstream schools 
  * Special classes in mainstream schools 
  * Special schools 

They may get additional educational support from special education teachers
and care support from special needs assistants (SNAs).

If your child has special educational needs, you should talk to the school
principal about the type of education that would suit your child. You can also
[ contact your local Special Educational Needs Organiser
](https://ncse.ie/regional-services-contact-list) to find out what learning
supports may be available.

You can read more about [ special needs education in primary schools
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/special-needs-education-primary-schools/)
and [ special needs education in post-primary schools
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-post-primary-school/post-primary-education-for-students-
with-special-needs/) .

The Department of Education provides [ information on how your child can get
additional teaching support in school (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/123794/92dd3bfe-
cc8d-4238-80f5-2592cee9d137.pdf) . The National Council for Special Education
(NCSE) has published an information booklet for parents of [ children with
Special Educational Needs (pdf) ](https://ncse.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/Information_Booklet_for_Parents.pdf) .

##  Returning to Ireland to study at third level

Third-level education in Ireland includes universities, institutes of
technology, colleges of education, and independent private colleges.

If you are planning to apply for a third-level place when you return to
Ireland, you need to understand the education system and [ how places are
allocated ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
.

If you have a qualification from another country and you want to apply for a
place in third-level education, you may need to get [ recognition for your
foreign qualification in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-
schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-in-ireland/) .

####  **Do I qualify for free third-level fees?**

To qualify for free fees in Ireland you must [ meet certain criteria
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/#lb01ca) , for example, you must
have been resident in Ireland or another EEA member state or Switzerland for 3
out of 5 years before your course start date.

If you do not qualify for free fees, you may still be eligible for EU fee
rates. EU fee rates are set by each third-level institution. You should
contact the one you are interested in to find out about the EU fee rate and if
you qualify.

Post-Leaving Certificate courses (PLCs) have different rules – see [ our page
on PLCs ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-
and-training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/#1ac69a) .

####  **Student grant**

The [ Student Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) is the main
financial support scheme for students in Ireland. It is also known as the SUSI
grant. You must meet [ all the conditions of the scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) to
qualify for the student grant.

If you do not meet the residence condition, you may still qualify for a fee
grant or a postgraduate fee contribution.

**Part-time courses**

A Part-Time Fee Scheme for certain part-time undergraduate courses is
available to eligible students for the 2024–25 academic year. The scheme is
means tested, which means that your household income must be below specific
limits.

Contact the college directly for more information about any of the [ approved
part-time courses ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/c3880-student-part-time-
fee-scheme-for-specified-undergraduate-courses-2024-information-q-a/#what-
courses-are-approved) .

You can [ apply on the SUSI website ](https://www.susi.ie/funding-for-part-
time-undergraduate-courses/) .

####  **Apprenticeship programmes in Ireland**

An apprenticeship provides on-the-job training with an employer. You can do an
apprenticeship across a wide range of industries such as:

  * Software development 
  * Accounting technician 
  * Catering (commis chef) 
  * Carpentry 
  * Plumbing 
  * Motor mechanics 
  * Electrical 

You can find information about apprenticeships on [ apprenticeship.ie
](https://www.apprenticeship.ie/) .

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 12 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/education-and-schooling/accessing-the-education-system-on-your-
return-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Accessing%20education%20when%20you%20return%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/education-and-schooling/accessing-the-education-system-on-your-
return-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/education-and-schooling/accessing-the-education-system-on-your-return-
to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Accessing%20education%20when%20you%20return%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/education-and-schooling/accessing-the-education-system-on-your-
return-to-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Enrol your child in primary school when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-primary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)

Information on choosing a primary school, how to apply for a school place,
receiving an offer and where to find help if you can’t find a suitable school.

2805.5222

  * [ _Managing your money when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-finances/organising-your-finances-on-your-return/)

This page has information on organising your finances when you return to
Ireland, including transfer of pensions and social insurance and benefits from
abroad.

2212.1826

  * [ _Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)

Information on buying car insurance after you return to Ireland, how to use
your claims free driving experience from abroad and what to do if you are
refused insurance cover.

2148.5508

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

