**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Residency and citizenship ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-
and-citizenship/) > Irish citizenship and passports for children born abroad

#  Irish citizenship and passports for children born abroad

  * Introduction 
  * Irish citizenship for children born outside Ireland 
  * Irish passports for children born outside Ireland 
  * Useful contacts 

##  Introduction

This page outlines how to get Irish citizenship for children who were born
abroad and have an Irish parent. It also covers how to apply for an Irish
passport for children born abroad.

##  Irish citizenship for children born outside Ireland

###  Children born abroad

If you (or the other parent of your child) are an Irish citizen who was born
in Ireland, then your child is automatically an Irish citizen, no matter where
they are born. This means that you can apply for an Irish passport for your
child.

If you or your child’s other parent were not born in Ireland, but one of you
is an Irish citizen, your child can get Irish citizenship, but you must [
register your child’s birth in the Foreign Birth Register
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/irish-
citizenship/foreign-births-register/) . Your child can apply for an Irish
passport once they are registered in the Foreign Birth Register.

###  Children adopted abroad

Adopted children have the same rights as your biological children as long as
the adoption is recognised under Irish law.

If you intend to adopt a child while living abroad, you should contact the [
Adoption Authority of Ireland ](https://www.aai.gov.ie/en/where-to-start.html)
.

If you have already adopted a child abroad and you have not registered the
adoption in Ireland, you should apply for the adoption to be entered in the [
Register of Intercountry Adoptions ](https://aai.gov.ie/en/who-we-are/inter-
country/rica.html) .

Once it is registered in Ireland, the adoption has the same legal status as if
the adoption was made in Ireland.

###  Step children

Step children are not automatically entitled to citizenship but they may be
eligible for residency under family reunification provisions.

##  Irish passports for children born outside Ireland

###  **Passport Online**

Your child must have their own passport and cannot be included on your
passport. You can apply for your child’s first passport using the [ Passport
Online ](https://passportonline.dfa.ie/Apply/Passport) service from anywhere
in the world on a smartphone, tablet, or computer.

If you are unable to access Passport Online, contact your [ local Irish
Embassy or Consulate ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/embassies/) for
information on how to get a paper form and how to submit it. You cannot
download an application form.

The Department of Foreign Affairs has up-to-date information on [ what
documents you will need ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/passports/documentary-
requirements/child/#First%20time%20applicant%20born%20abroad) for the
application.

###  **Post Passport**

You can also use the [ Post Passport service provided by An Post
](https://www.anpost.com/Government-Services/Post-Passport) if you have moved
back to Ireland and want to apply for your child’s passport. Be aware that
applications can take approximately 6-8 weeks to process.

If you are an Irish citizen living in Ireland and would like to use the Post
Passport service, you must follow [ several steps
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/passports/post-passport/#How%20to%20apply) .

Make sure you have the following:

  * 4 passport photographs of the child, 2 of which have been signed by a witness as per instructions provided with the application form 
  * Child's birth certificate 
  * Appropriate fee 
  * PPS number (if the child is resident in Ireland) 
  * [ Additional documentation ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/passports/passports-for-children/#d3ad61) to confirm the child’s Irish citizenship. The documents you need to provide depend on how your child became an Irish citizen. 

Read more about the [ documents you need when applying for a child’s passport
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/passports/passports-for-children/#d3ad61) .

###  **Documents needed if the child’s parents are Irish citizens who were
born in Ireland**

You must provide the following documents:

  * Your child’s full birth certificate 
  * Your full birth certificate 
  * Your marriage certificate (if applicable) 

Depending on your situation, you may need to provide further documentation.

###  **Documents needed if the child’s parents are Irish citizens who were not
born in Ireland**

If you or your child’s other parent were not born in Ireland, but one of you
is an Irish citizen, you must register your child’s birth in the [ Foreign
Birth Register
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/citizenship/#Foreign%20Birth%20Registration) .

You will get a Certificate of Registration, which you can then use along with
the documents listed above to apply for the passport at your nearest Irish
embassy or consulate.

You can read more on [ applying for your child's first Irish passport
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/passports/passports-for-children/) .

##  Useful contacts

###  **Passport Office (Dublin)**

Knockmaun House  
42-47 Lower Mount Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 TN83  
**Opening Hours:** 9:00am–5:00pm, Mon-Fri

###  **Passport Office (Cork)**

Passport Office  
1a South Mall  
Cork  
T12 TA46  
**Opening Hours:** 9:00am–5:00pm, Mon-Fri

###  **Phone**

You can call the [ Customer Service Hub
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/passports/contact-
us/#Customer%20Service%20Hub) on:

  * +353 1 671 1633 for Passport queries, and 
  * +353 1 568 3331 for Foreign Birth Registration queries. 

Phone lines are open from 9am–4:30pm, Monday to Friday.

###  **WebChat**

[ WebChat ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/passports/contact-us/#WebChat) is
open from 9am–4.30pm, Monday to Friday. During business hours, please refresh
the page if the webchat icon is grey. When it is green, you can connect to a
WebChat agent.

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 12 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/irish-citizenship-and-passports-for-
children-born-abroad/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Irish%20citizenship%20and%20passports%20for%20children%20born%20abroad&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/irish-citizenship-and-passports-for-
children-born-abroad/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/residency-and-citizenship/irish-citizenship-and-passports-for-
children-born-abroad/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Irish%20citizenship%20and%20passports%20for%20children%20born%20abroad&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/irish-citizenship-and-passports-for-
children-born-abroad/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Diplomatic supports for Irish people abroad_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-abroad/leaving-ireland/diplomatic-supports/)

The types of support offered by Irish embassies and consulates abroad.

2605.8928

  * [ _PPS numbers for returning Irish emigrants and their families_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-and-families/)

Find your existing PPS number or apply for a new PPS number when returning
home to Ireland. You can also apply for a PPS number for a child born abroad.

2557.0586

  * [ _Irish passports - an overview_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/passports/irish-passports-an-overview/)

Who can apply for an Irish passport? Where can Irish passport holders travel?
Our overview document answers your questions.

2436.971

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

