**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Organising your finances ](/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-
your-finances/) > Banking and returning to Ireland

#  Banking and returning to Ireland

  * Opening a bank account 
  * Using your account from another country 
  * Non-resident bank accounts 
  * Basic bank accounts (EU residents only) 
  * More information 

##  Opening a bank account

If you are returning to Ireland, you may want to open an Irish bank account.

Before you [ open a bank account
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/opening-a-bank-account/) , you must [ show proof of identity
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/financial-institutions-and-identification/) (such as a valid
passport or driving licence) and proof of address (such a recent utility
bill). In general, this means you cannot open an Irish bank account until you
have arrived home.

You may not need to open a bank account in Ireland if you already have an
account in the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) - see 'Using your account from
another country' below.

If you need a bank account in Ireland, some banks offer 'non-resident'
accounts, which you may be able to open before you return home - see more
below.

If you are resident in another European Union (EU) country and you do not have
a bank account in Ireland, you can open a 'basic bank account', which you can
use for everyday banking.

##  Using your account from another country

If you are returning to Ireland from another SEPA (Single Euro Payments Area)
country, you can continue using your bank account from that country, for
payments and transfers in euro.

For example, your new employer in Ireland can pay your wages into your German
account.

You can also set up direct debits with Irish utility companies using your
International Bank Account Number (IBAN) from another SEPA country.

This means you do not need to open a new Irish bank account to be paid by your
employer or to pay for utilities.

If you make a euro payment to another EU country, your bank cannot charge you
more than it would to make the transaction within your country.

This applies to electronic transactions including:

  * Bank account transfers 
  * Debit or credit card payments 
  * Direct debits 
  * Cash machine (ATM) withdrawals 

###  **SEPA countries**

SEPA countries include:

  * All countries in the EU 
  * The United Kingdom 
  * Iceland 
  * Liechtenstein 
  * Monaco 
  * Norway 
  * Switzerland 
  * Andorra 
  * San Marino 
  * Vatican City 

####  **SEPA, the UK and Brexit**

Although the United Kingdom left the European Union in 2020 (often called
‘Brexit’), the UK continues to be part of SEPA.

This means you can continue to use your UK IBAN for payments and transfers in
euro. You may be asked to give additional information, such as the BIC code
and address of your bank.

###  **My employer or utility company won’t accept my IBAN**

Employers and companies in Ireland must accept IBANs from other SEPA
countries. This is set out in [ Article 9 of the SEPA Regulation (pdf)
](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32012R0260&from=EN) , and [ SI 132/2013
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2013/si/132/made/en/print) .

If your SEPA IBAN is not accepted, this is called ‘IBAN discrimination’. You
should make a written complaint to the employer or utility company, advising
them of their obligation.

If that does not resolve the issue, you can report it to the responsible
authority:

  * The [ Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/consumers-home/contact/) for cases between consumers and traders, for example, utility companies 
  * [ The Central Bank of Ireland ](https://www.centralbank.ie/consumer-hub/explainers/what-is-iban-discrimination-and-what-can-i-do-about-it) for other cases, for example, between employees and employers 

Read our page on how to [ Complain about utilities
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/how-to-complain/complain-
about-utilities/) .

##  Non-resident bank accounts

Some banks in Ireland offer ‘non-resident’ accounts. This means you might be
able to set up an Irish bank account before you return home.

You still must prove your identity and address (this requirement is set out in
[ anti-money laundering legislation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/money-laundering-in-ireland/) ), but the bank may accept a
foreign utility bill, for example, if it has been certified by a solicitor or
police officer.

Different banks have their own requirements, so you should contact your
preferred bank directly for advice.

##  Basic bank accounts (EU residents only)

If you are resident of any EU country and you do not already have a bank
account in Ireland, you can open a basic bank account.

A basic bank account is like a current account, but there are no charges for
everyday banking for at least the first year. This means you can withdraw cash
from an ATM and use a debit card for payments without any extra cost. However,
your debit card may not come with the contactless payment feature.

Read more about [ basic bank accounts
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/standard-bank-account/) .

##  More information

You can get [ more information about your banking options when returning to
Ireland ](https://bpfi.ie/insights/bank-accounts-for-returning-emigrants/)
from Banking and Payments Federation Ireland (BPFI).

You can also contact any of the banks in Ireland directly to discuss your
options.

###  Commission for Regulation of Utilities

Customer Care Team

P.O. Box 11934  
Dublin 24  
D24 PXW0  
Ireland

**Locall:** 1800 404 404

**Fax:** (01) 4000 850

**Homepage:** [ http://www.cru.ie/ ](http://www.cru.ie/)

**Email:** [ customercare@cru.ie ](mailto:customercare@cru.ie)

###  Competition and Consumer Protection Commission

Bloom House  
Railway Street  
Dublin 1  
D01 C576

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday–Friday, from 9am–6pm

**Tel:** (01) 402 5555

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ccpc.ie ](http://www.ccpc.ie)

###  Central Bank of Ireland

Financial Regulation

New Wapping Street  
North Wall Quay  
Dublin 1  
D01 F7X3  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 224 5800

**Homepage:** [ http://www.centralbank.ie ](http://www.centralbank.ie)

**Email:** [ enquiries@centralbank.ie ](mailto:enquiries@centralbank.ie)

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 16 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/organising-your-finances/banking-and-returning-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Banking%20and%20returning%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/organising-your-finances/banking-and-returning-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/organising-your-finances/banking-and-returning-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Banking%20and%20returning%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/organising-your-finances/banking-and-returning-to-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and having a baby_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-baby/)

Outlines what public maternity care services you can access when you return to
Ireland and your entitlements to take leave from work when you have a baby.

1712.1594

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and working in construction_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/returning-to-ireland-and-working-in-construction/)

Provides information on careers in construction, Safepass, certifications, and
recognition of foreign qualifications, as well as details about trade unions,
wages, and pensions for those returning to Ireland and seeking to begin or
continue work in the construction industry.

1712.1594

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from the United Kingdom_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-kingdom/)

If you’re an Irish citizen returning from the United Kingdom, this page can
provide you with information on topics including UK pensions, healthcare, and
housing. There is also information on this page about education and finding
work in Ireland.

1558.024

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

