**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Finding somewhere to live ](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-
somewhere-to-live/) > Housing supports for returning Irish emigrants

#  Housing supports for returning Irish emigrants

  * Introduction 
  * Social housing support 
  * Supports to rent or buy a home 
  * Housing supports for older people returning to Ireland 
  * Adapting a property you already own 
  * Emergency accommodation 

##  Introduction

As an Irish citizen, you have the right to live and work in Ireland,
regardless of how many years you have lived abroad.

If you return home to Ireland and have difficulty paying rent or buying
suitable accommodation, you may qualify for social housing or financial
support from the State.

Depending on your age and circumstances, you may be eligible for housing
supports for older people.

##  Social housing support

If you can’t afford to pay for accommodation when you return to Ireland, you
may be able to get social housing support. In general, this is for people who
have a long-term housing need.

###  **Local connection**

To apply for social housing, download an application form from [ your local
authority's ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/)
website.

You can only apply to one local authority at a time, and you must choose an
area with which you have a ‘local connection’. This means that you (or a
member of your household):

  * Lived in the area at any time for a continuous period of 5 years 
  * Worked in the area (or within a 15km radius) 
  * Are in full-time education in the area 
  * Have an enduring physical, sensory, mental health or intellectual impairment and are attending a medical service in the area in relation to that impairment 
  * Have a relative who has been living in the area for at least 2 years 

As you are returning to Ireland from abroad, it might be difficult to meet the
‘local connection’ requirement. Try to give as much evidence as possible, such
as letters from friends, membership of local clubs, or proof of attending a
local college.

In some cases, **the local authority can waive the local connection
requirement** .

Read more about [ showing a local connection when applying for social housing
support ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-
somewhere-to-live/guide-to-housing-supports-for-returning-irish-
emigrants#l80745) .

###  **Applying for social housing**

When you apply for social housing, the authority will assess your eligibility
and your need.

####  **Your eligibility**

Your income must be under a certain amount to qualify for social housing.
Currently, this ranges from €30,000 to €40,000, depending on where you want to
live.

You must also show that you do not have suitable alternative accommodation,
such as:

  * A property in another area or country 
  * Accommodation belonging to a family member that you could reasonably be expected to live in 

####  **Your need**

The housing authority will consider your current accommodation, including
whether it’s overcrowded, unfit for human habitation, or emergency
accommodation.

Read more about [ how your eligibility and need for social housing is assessed
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/#laf763) .

###  **After you apply**

The local authority must decide if you qualify for social housing within 12
weeks of getting your application form. This time-frame can be extended if
they need additional information, which they will request from you.

Read [ what happens when your application is accepted or refused
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/applying-for-local-authority-housing/#l9f543) .

You can also see information on [ social housing waiting lists
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/social-housing-waiting-lists/) and [ your rights as an approved
housing body tenant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-
authority-and-social-housing/your-rights-as-an-ahb-tenant/) .

##  Supports to rent or buy a home

###  **Help with paying rent**

Depending on your circumstances when you return to Ireland, you may qualify
for [ rent supports ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-
home/help-with-renting/) . However, you cannot apply for these supports
immediately when you arrive.

For example, to qualify for the [ Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-
renting/housing-assistance-payment/) , you must already be on your local
authority’s social housing list (see ‘Social housing’ above). Similarly, you
must be living in rented accommodation for at least 6 months (183 days) of the
last 12 months to be eligible for [ Rent Supplement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) .

###  **Help with buying a home**

If you plan to buy a property when you return to Ireland, you can read about [
Taking out a mortgage ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) .

You can also check if you qualify for the [ Help to Buy Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/help-to-buy-scheme) . This scheme helps first-time buyers
purchase a newly built house or apartment. You can also get it for once-off
self-build homes. However, **you cannot get the Help to Buy Scheme if you
owned a home abroad** .

Other schemes you may be interested in are the [ First Home Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/first-home-scheme/) and  
[ Local Authority Affordable Purchase Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/local-authority-affordable-purchase-scheme/) . These are 'shared
equity' schemes, where the State or the local authority takes a stake in your
home to help you buy it.

Read more about [ Help with buying a home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/) .

##  Housing supports for older people returning to Ireland

If you are an older Irish emigrant returning to Ireland from abroad, and you
need housing assistance, there are several options available to you.

###  **Social housing for older people**

Some local authorities provide accommodation specifically for older people.
This type of community accommodation (called ‘sheltered’ housing) may have
extra security features, such as wardens and security cameras. You may also
get on-site meals and nursing care (though it is not a nursing home).

Each local authority allocates housing in accordance with its own housing
allocation scheme, so you will need to [ contact your local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to find out if
this type of accommodation is available in the area you want to live.

The age limit for this type of accommodation can also vary from one local
authority to another.

###  **Approved housing bodies for older people**

[ Approved housing bodies (AHBs)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-
housing/approved-housing-bodies/) provide similar housing to local
authorities, with some dedicated homes for older people.

They have some discretion about who they will give housing to, but most of
their housing is assigned in consultation with the local authority.

###  **Safe Home Ireland**

[ Safe Home Ireland ](https://safehomeireland.com/) provides housing
assistance to older Irish emigrants who are returning to Ireland. They may be
able to find social or AHB housing for you before you return, if you have
difficulty finding accommodation yourself. They also provide information and
advocacy for returning emigrants and will do home visits and outreach to
eligible applicants.

Read more about [ housing for older people
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-disabilities/older-
people-housing/) .

##  Adapting a property you already own

###  Older people and people with disabilities

If you already own a property in Ireland and meet certain eligibility
criteria, you can [ apply for the Mobility Aids Grant Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/mobility-aids-grant-scheme/) (for example, to add a stairlift or
an accessible shower).

You may also qualify for the [ Housing Aid for Older People Grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/) (for example, to upgrade
electrical wiring or provide central heating).

See more [ grants for older people and people with disabilities
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/mobility-aids-grant-scheme/) .

You can also visit the [ Age Friendly Homes website
](https://agefriendlyhomes.ie/) for information on adapting an existing home,
new accessible homes, housing grants, housing design, housing policy and
research.

###  If the house is vacant or derelict

If you own a property that was built before 2008 and has been vacant for 2
years or more, you may qualify for the [ Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/vacant-property-
refurbishment-grant/) . If eligible, you can get a grant of up to €50,000 to
renovate a vacant property and up to €70,000, if the property is derelict.

##  Emergency accommodation

If you will be homeless when you return to Ireland, you may be able to access
emergency accommodation. This is for people who are homeless and includes
hostels, B&Bs, hotels, and family hubs.

If you need emergency accommodation, contact [ your local authority
](https://www.housing.gov.ie/local-government/administration/local-
authorities/local-authorities) . You will be assessed by a Housing Officer who
will confirm your emergency housing needs. Your emergency accommodation may
vary depending on which local authority you go to, and whether you need
housing as an individual or a family.

Read more about [ returning to Ireland in a crisis
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/returning-in-
crisis/returning-to-ireland-in-crisis/) .

You can also visit the [ Crosscare Irish Diaspora Support Project
](http://www.diasporasupport.ie/) website for more information if you will be
homeless when you return to Ireland.

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 14 September 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/guide-to-housing-supports-for-returning-
irish-emigrants/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Housing%20supports%20for%20returning%20Irish%20emigrants&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/guide-to-housing-supports-for-returning-
irish-emigrants/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/guide-to-housing-supports-for-returning-
irish-emigrants/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Housing%20supports%20for%20returning%20Irish%20emigrants&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/guide-to-housing-supports-for-returning-
irish-emigrants/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _PPS numbers for returning Irish emigrants and their families_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-and-families/)

Find your existing PPS number or apply for a new PPS number when returning
home to Ireland. You can also apply for a PPS number for a child born abroad.

2446.4434

  * [ _Social welfare payments for returning Irish emigrants_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/accessing-social-welfare-as-a-returning-Irish-emigrant/)

Explains who can get a social welfare payment when returning to Ireland and
how to apply.

2203.69

  * [ _Housing and other supports for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)

Housing and other supports for homeless people.

2018.7509

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

