**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Coming home with children ](/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-
home-with-children/) > Returning to Ireland and having a baby

#  Returning to Ireland and having a baby

  * Introduction 
  * Can I access maternity care in the public health system? 
  * Can I get paid maternity leave from work? 
  * Can I get paid paternity leave from work? 
  * Can I get parental leave? 
  * After your baby is born 

##  Introduction

If you or your partner are pregnant, you need to know about the maternity care
system in Ireland and the benefits and supports available to you.

If you have a baby when you return to live in Ireland, you can access
maternity care through the public health system.

You may plan to use private health services for maternity care. If you intend
to take out private health insurance to help cover the costs, you should know
that there is a 52-week waiting period for maternity-related claims. You can
read more in [ Returning to Ireland and buying private health insurance
](/en/returning-to-ireland/looking-after-your-health/returning-to-ireland-and-
buying-private-health-insurance/) .

This page outlines what you need to know about having a baby in Ireland and
directs you to further information.

##  Can I access maternity care in the public health system?

If you are returning to Ireland to live and you plan to have a baby here, you
will be entitled to public health maternity care under the [ Maternity and
Infant Care Scheme ](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/maternity-
and-infant-welfare-services/) . This is because your entitlement to use public
health services is based on your residency. It is not linked to your income or
to your payment of tax or [ social insurance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) .

The Maternity and Infant Care Scheme provides a care programme to all
expectant mothers who are _ordinarily resident_ in Ireland. You are [
ordinarily resident ](/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-public-health-
services/) if you have been living in Ireland for at least a year or if you
intend to live here for at least one year.

Under the Scheme, you are entitled to free GP visits and hospital visits
related to your pregnancy and the birth of your baby. This service is provided
by a family doctor (GP) of your choice and a hospital obstetrician. You are
entitled to this free service even if you do not have a [ medical card or a GP
visit card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/) .

Care for illnesses that are not related to your pregnancy are not covered by
the Scheme. This means that if you need to see your GP about a non-pregnancy
related illness (such as asthma), normal GP charges will apply (unless you
have a medical card or a GP visit card).

You can find out more in our page on [ maternity and infant care services
](/en/health/health-services/reproductive_health/maternity-and-infant-welfare-
services/) .

##  Can I get paid maternity leave from work?

If you are pregnant while in employment, you are entitled to [ maternity leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) . You can get maternity leave
from work regardless of how long you have been working for a company or the
number of hours worked per week. It includes casual workers.

You can take up to 42 weeks off work, for maternity leave. This is usually
made up of 26 weeks’ paid leave (if you are eligible) and a further 16 weeks’
unpaid leave. You do not have to take the unpaid leave.

While you are on maternity leave, you may be entitled to [ Maternity Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/maternity-benefit/) from the Department of Social Protection.

Maternity Benefit is a payment made to women who are on maternity leave from
work and have enough [ Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) contributions
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) .

Maternity Benefit is paid at a standard weekly rate of €274 in 2024 for 26
weeks.

If you do not have enough PRSI contributions from your employment in Ireland,
you may be able to [ use social insurance contributions paid in a country
covered by EU Regulations and the UK
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-
abroad/) . You must be in insurable employment in Ireland and have paid your
most recent PRSI contribution in Ireland.

You can find out more about [ qualifying for Maternity Benefit and how to
apply ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/maternity-benefit/#8c8ffb) .

Your employer does not have to pay you when you are on maternity leave. Some
employers may offer paid maternity leave, and you should check your employment
contract to see what applies to you. If your employer pays you while you are
on maternity leave, you may have to transfer payment of your Maternity Benefit
to your employer.

##  Can I get paid paternity leave from work?

New parents (not including the mother of the child) are entitled to 2 weeks’
paternity leave from employment or self-employment after the birth or the
adoption of a child.

You can start paternity leave at any time within the first 6 months of the
birth or adoption.

Paternity Benefit is paid at a standard weekly rate of €274 in 2024.

You can find out more about [ qualifying for Paternity Benefit and how to
apply ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-
and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/) .

Your employer does not have to pay you when you are on paternity leave. Some
employers may offer paid paternity leave and you should check your employment
contract to see what applies to you. If your employer pays you while you are
on paternity leave, you may have to transfer the payment of your Paternity
Benefit to your employer.

##  Can I get parental leave?

You are entitled to **unpaid** parental leave of 26 working weeks per child.
It must be taken before your child turns 12, or 16 if the child has a
disability.

Both parents have an equal and separate entitlement to parental leave for each
child.

Generally, you must have been working for your employer for one year before
you are entitled to parental leave – although some employers offer the option
of parental leave immediately.

The legislation for parental leave provides for only the minimum entitlement.
Your contract of employment may give you more leave or other entitlements. You
can find out more on our page about [ parental leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/parental-leave/) .

###  **Parents leave and Parent' Benefit**

[ Parent’s leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-leave/#2473e9) entitles each parent to 9
weeks’ leave during the first 2 years of a child’s life, or in the case of
adoption, within 2 years of the placement of the child with the family.

[ Parent’s Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/) is paid while you are on
parent’s leave from work if you have enough social insurance (PRSI)
contributions.

##  After your baby is born

You should register the birth of your child no later than 3 months after their
birth. Registration is a legal requirement in Ireland. Once the birth is
registered, your baby will be given a [ PPS number
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/personal-public-service-number/) and you can [ get a birth certificate
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-
birth-marriage-or-death-certificate/) , which you will need to [ enrol your
child in school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-school/) , to
[ apply for a passport ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/passports/applying-for-or-renewing-an-irish-passport/) , and for
many other purposes.

Read more on our page about [ Registering the birth of your baby
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-
baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/) .

If you register the birth of a baby who is born in Ireland within 3 months of
the birth, the Department of Social Protection will automatically contact you
about [ Child Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) . If you register after 3
months, you will have to contact Client Identity Services and the Department
of Social Protection to arrange the PPS number and Child Benefit.

Read more about the supports available to you [ after your baby is born
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-
baby-is-born/) .

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 7 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-
baby/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20and%20having%20a%20baby&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-
baby/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-
baby/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20and%20having%20a%20baby&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-
baby/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Accessing education when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/accessing-the-education-system-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

This page includes information on accessing education when you return to
Ireland. It covers free pre-school education, enrolling in primary or
secondary school, third level fees, the student grant and more.

2235.8042

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and working in construction_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/returning-to-ireland-and-working-in-construction/)

Provides information on careers in construction, Safepass, certifications, and
recognition of foreign qualifications, as well as details about trade unions,
wages, and pensions for those returning to Ireland and seeking to begin or
continue work in the construction industry.

2178.7996

  * [ _Moving to Ireland and your social security entitlements_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/introduction-to-the-irish-system/moving-to-ireland-and-your-social-security-entitlements/)

Your social welfare entitlements if you move to Ireland from abroad.

2126.426

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

