**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Returning to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-
ireland/) > [ Education and schooling ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-
and-schooling/) > How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland

#  How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * How do I get my academic qualification recognised in Ireland? 
  * Can I apply to college in Ireland if I have a non-Irish qualification? 
  * What are the academic entry requirements to study in Ireland? 
  * The National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ) 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you want to work or study in Ireland and your academic qualification is
from another country, you may need to get your qualification recognised in
Ireland.

You should get your foreign academic qualification recognised before you apply
for jobs or courses to give yourself the best chance of success.

This page outlines how to get your foreign academic qualification recognised
in Ireland. It also explains how the National Framework of Qualifications
(NFQ) can help you compare the level of different qualifications.

If your work requires a professional qualification, such as teaching or
accountancy, you will need to have your **professional qualification**
recognised. The process for [ getting your professional qualification
recognised ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/starting-work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-ireland/)
is different from having your academic qualification recognised.

###  **Qualifications from Ukraine**

If you are coming to Ireland from Ukraine, Quality and Qualifications Ireland
have information (in Ukrainian) about its [ academic qualifications
recognition service (pdf)
](https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2022-03/naric-guide-ukraine.pdf) .
This guide helps you use QQI’s foreign qualifications recognition service
(NARIC).

##  How do I get my academic qualification recognised in Ireland?

You can compare your foreign qualification to an Irish qualification of a
similar type on the [ NARIC website
](https://qsearch.qqi.ie/WebPart/Search?searchtype=recognitions) . NARIC
compares academic qualifications based on the Irish National Framework of
Qualifications (NFQ). The NFQ is a system of 10 levels used to describe
qualifications in the Irish education and training system.

To compare your qualification:

  1. Search for your foreign qualification on the [ NARIC database ](http://qsearch.qqi.ie/WebPart/Search?searchtype=recognitions)
  2. Download a comparability statement 

The comparability statement will help you, your employer, or education
provider to understand your qualification in relation to the Irish education
system.

If your qualification is not listed on the NARIC database, NARIC may be able
to give you a generic comparability statement for your foreign qualification.
You can apply for recognition advice by [ submitting an online form
](https://forms.qqi.ie/naric/award-queries) .

NARIC has published a guide on [ how to get your foreign qualification
recognised (pdf)
](https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2022-07/NARIC%20Guide%20-%20English%20V1.pdf)
. You can also find [ guides in different languages on the website
](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-do/the-qualifications-system/national-academic-
recognition-information-centre) .

##  Can I apply to college in Ireland if I have a non-Irish qualification?

If you are an EU student and you want to study an undergraduate course in
Ireland, you should apply through the [ Central Applications Office (CAO)
](http://www.cao.ie/) . The CAO manages a centralised application system for
most full-time undergraduate courses in Ireland. In general, you do not apply
to the college directly for your place.

For postgraduate courses, you generally apply directly to the university or
college. Contact the admissions office of the institution you want to attend
for more information.

###  **Non-EU students**

If you are a non-EU student, contact the admissions office of the college
where you want to study to ask if you should apply directly to them or through
the CAO.

It is very important to check the application procedure for your course, as
you may not be able to make changes after you submit your application. You
should make your enquiries well before the CAO closing date of 1 February in
the year your course starts, preferably not later than the previous 15
December.

You can read more in our page on [ college application procedures and entrance
requirements ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
.

##  What are the academic entry requirements to study in Ireland?

You must meet the academic entry requirements (also called matriculation
requirements) for the course you want to take. You can find information about
entry requirements on the websites of the universities, institutes of
technology, and colleges of education where you would like to study.

###  **English language requirements**

If English is not your first language, you must have proof of your English
proficiency, either through your school leaving examination or a recognised
English language test.

You can find a list of recognised English language tests on page 10 of the
guide on [ agreed entry requirements criteria for EU/EFTA Applicants (other
than Irish Leaving Certificate) (pdf)
](https://www2.cao.ie/downloads/documents/2024/Guidelines-EU-EFTA-UK-2024.pdf)
.

All English language certificates must have been issued within 2 years of the
expected start date of your course.

##  The National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ)

The [ National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ) ](https://www.qqi.ie/what-we-
do/the-qualifications-system/national-framework-of-qualifications) is a system
of 10 levels that allow you to compare different types of qualifications
available in Ireland.

Qualifications on the framework include:

  * Junior Cycle (NFQ Levels 1, 2, and 3) 
  * Leaving Certificate (NFQ Levels 4 and 5) 
  * Advanced Certificate / Higher Certificate (NFQ Level 6) 
  * Ordinary Bachelor Degree (NFQ Level 7) 
  * Honours Bachelor Degree / Higher Diploma (NFQ Level 8) 
  * Masters Degree / Postgraduate Diploma (NFQ Level 9) 
  * Doctoral Degree (NFQ Level 10) 

The NFQ helps you to make choices and consider what options are available for
your further studies. The NFQ can also help you explain what qualifications
you hold or are studying for. This is important when you are considering
further learning or when you are applying for a job at home or abroad.

For example, a Bachelor Honours Degree from Australia is comparable to an
Honours Bachelor Degree in Ireland at NFQ Level 8. A Master Craftsman’s
Diploma (Meisterbrief pre-December 2012) from Germany is comparable to an
Advanced Certificate in Ireland at NFQ Level 6.

##  Further information

The National Learners Database has information on entry requirements for all
third-level courses in Ireland on [ Qualifax.ie ](https://www.qualifax.ie/) .

The European Commission has an online tool that allows you to [ compare and
contrast qualifications within Europe
](https://ec.europa.eu/ploteus/search/site?f%5b0%5d=im_field_entity_type%3A97)
.

Quality and Qualifications Ireland (QQI) has specific guides on how to:

  * [ Compare UK qualifications (pdf) ](https://www.qqi.ie/sites/default/files/2023-08/Qualifications%20Can%20Cross%20Boundaries-Aug-2023_0.pdf)
  * [ Compare qualifications in Ireland and Hong Kong (pdf) ](https://www.qqi.ie/Downloads/36563-IRELAND-HONG%20KONG%20Booklet_FINAL.pdf#search=hong%20kong%2A)
  * [ Compare qualifications between Ireland and New Zealand (pdf) ](https://www.qqi.ie/Downloads/NZQA%20New%20Zealand%20Webx.pdf)

Read our page on [ recognition of professional qualifications in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-
work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-ireland/) .

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Page edited:** 19 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-
recognised-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=How%20to%20get%20your%20foreign%20qualification%20recognised%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-
recognised-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-
in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=How%20to%20get%20your%20foreign%20qualification%20recognised%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-
to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-
recognised-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Recognition of professional qualifications in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-ireland/)

Outlines how professional qualifications are regulated in Ireland and in the
EU including the following professions: electrician, teacher, architect,
doctor, accountant and more

2588.5444

  * [ _Support services for foreign nationals in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/support-services-for-foreign-nationals/)

List of organisations providing information and support to foreign nationals
in Ireland.

1960.0366

  * [ _Getting motor insurance when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-motor-insurance-on-return-to-ireland/)

Information on buying car insurance after you return to Ireland, how to use
your claims free driving experience from abroad and what to do if you are
refused insurance cover.

1746.104

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

