**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Case studies, checklists and worksheets ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/) > Checklist when appealing a social
welfare decision

#  Checklist when appealing a social welfare decision

  * Introduction 
  * Before you make an appeal 
  * Preparing your case 
  * Making your appeal 
  * Social welfare appeal hearings 
  * Social welfare appeal decisions 

##  Introduction

If you are unhappy with a decision of the Department of Social Protection, you
can make an appeal. The Social Welfare Appeals Office handles appeals about
most social welfare payments.

There are a number of stages involved in the appeal process. This checklist
outlines these stages and explains the process involved in making an appeal to
the Social Welfare Appeals Office.

##  Before you make an appeal

####  **Is the payment or scheme you wish to appeal covered by the Social
Welfare Appeals Office?**

You can find a list of payments [ covered by the Social Welfare Appeals Office
(pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/42571/5e0eb903e82c432482943283fd667a16.pdf#page=1) .

If the payment or scheme you wish to appeal is [ not covered by the Social
Welfare Appeals Office ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/#8c4f18) , you can
ask for a review of the decision by the section of the Department of Social
Protection that dealt with your application, but you cannot bring it to a
formal appeal.

####  **Are you within the time limits for making an appeal?**

You must appeal within 21 days of the date of the decision letter.

If your application is late, you must give the reasons why it is late. Appeals
Officers do **not** have to accept late applications.

####  **Do you need help with making your appeal?**

Some voluntary organisations (such as [ your local Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) ) can help you to decide if you have
grounds for an appeal. They can help you to prepare your case and may even go
with you on the day of your oral hearing.

##  Preparing your case

####  **Why do you not agree with the Department of Social Protection's
decision?**

In your appeal you must:

  * State why you think the decision was not correct 
  * Include copies of any evidence and documents you want to be considered (you should keep your original documents) 
  * Enclose a copy of the letter you got from the Deciding Officer or Designated Person that informed you of the decision 

You should arrange your documents in date order and if using photocopies of
original documents, make sure they are legible.

You can [ find case studies of previous social welfare appeals decisions
](https://communitylawandmediation.ie/our-work/social-welfare-appeals-case-
studies/about-social-welfare-appeals-case-studies/) on the Community Law &
Mediation website.

##  Making your appeal

You should complete a [ Notice of Appeal form (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/266425/135d508b-4c91-48ec-9852-36c5d024560f.pdf#page=null)
and submit it with your documents within 21 days of receiving the decision
letter.

Remember, the Notice of Appeal form should contain:

  * Your name, address and date of birth 
  * Your [ Personal Public Service Number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/)
  * Information about the decision you are appealing, including a copy of the decision letter 
  * Any facts and points that support your appeal that the decision made in your case was wrong 
  * Any other documents that support your appeal, for example, copies of letters from your doctor or social worker, or other letters from the Department of Social Protection 

You can contact your local [ Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for help with this or any part of
your appeal.

####  How to submit your appeal

You may be able to [ make your appeal online with MyWelfare
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/appeals/make-an-appeal/) , if you
have a verified [ MyGovID account. ](https://www.mygovid.ie/) You can also
post your appeal to the [ Social Welfare Appeals Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/dd7b8-contact-the-social-welfare-appeals-
office/) .

####  **Has the Social Welfare Appeals Office confirmed they got your
appeal?**

You should get a letter from the Social Welfare Appeals Office telling you
they have received your appeal. It will contain your Appeal Reference Number.

You should put your Appeal Reference Number on all written communication with
the Social Welfare Appeals Office. You should also have it to hand if you
phone them.

##  Social welfare appeal hearings

####  **Did you get a letter with a decision from the Social Welfare Appeals
Office?**

The Appeals Officer can make a decision using the information you sent in your
Notice of Appeal form.

####  **Did you get a letter requesting you to attend an oral hearing?**

In some cases, the Appeals Officer may wish to talk with you before they make
a decision. In this case, you will be invited to attend an oral hearing.

Don't worry - an oral hearing is a good opportunity for the Appeals Officer to
get to know your case in more detail. You can bring a representative, for
example a friend or trade union official, to the hearing with you for support
or assistance.

####  **Did you take note of the date, time and location of the hearing?**

Be sure to arrive on time to your hearing. Appeal hearings are non-
confrontational. The Appeals Officer is there to listen to your point of view
and will make a fair decision.

If you cannot make the oral hearing, contact the Social Welfare Appeals Office
as soon as possible so a change of date can be arranged.

##  Social welfare appeal decisions

####  **You will be given a decision on your case**

If you attended an oral hearing, you should get a decision on your case within
2 or 3 weeks.

The Appeals Officer will write to both you and the Department of Social
Protection to tell you their decision and the reasons for it. If your appeal
is not successful, the Appeals Officer will explain why.

####  **If your appeal is unsuccessful**

Generally, an Appeals Officer's decision is final.

However, a decision can be revised in the following circumstances:

  * An Appeals Officer may revise their decision if new evidence or facts, or any relevant change of circumstances, comes to light after a decision is made 
  * The Chief Appeals Officer may revise an Appeals Officerâ€™s decision if a mistake was made in relation to the law or facts of the case 

In either case, you must submit a written statement explaining why you are
seeking a review.

You may also seek a judicial review of the Appeals Officer's decision in the
Courts, but only on a point of law.

The [ Office of the Ombudsman
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/) can also examine
complaints about the actions and everyday administrative activities of the
Social Welfare Appeals Office.

You can read more about [ how to appeal a social welfare decision
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/#b8597d) .

_**Page edited:** 29 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/checklist-when-
appealing-a-social-welfare-decision/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Checklist%20when%20appealing%20a%20social%20welfare%20decision&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/checklist-when-
appealing-a-social-welfare-decision/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/checklist-when-
appealing-a-social-welfare-decision/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Checklist%20when%20appealing%20a%20social%20welfare%20decision&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/checklist-when-
appealing-a-social-welfare-decision/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to appeal a social welfare decision_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/)

Information about how to appeal decisions about social welfare payments to the
Social Welfare Appeals Office.

1907.9955

  * [ _Appealing a workplace relations decision_ ](/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/employment-appeals/)

The Labour Court is the single appeal body for all workplace relations
appeals. Find out how to make an appeal to the Labour Court.

1668.5958

  * [ _International protection decisions and appeals_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/if-your-application-for-refugee-status-is-refused/)

This page describes the appeals process in the event that you do not get a
declaration as a refugee.

1434.1489

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

