**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Back to Education ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/) > Part-Time
Education Option

#  Part-Time Education Option

  * Introduction 
  * How to qualify for the Part-Time Education Option 
  * Rate of Part-Time Education Option 
  * How to apply for the Part-TimeEducation Option 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Part-Time Education Option (PTEO) allows you to keep your [ Jobseeker’s
Allowance (JA) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
or [ Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) (JBSE)
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/) and
attend a part-time day or evening course of education or training.

You must continue to meet the conditions for Jobseeker’s Benefit, Jobseeker's
Benefit (Self-Employed) or Jobseeker’s Allowance. This means that you must be
able to show that you are still actively looking for full-time work, willing
to take up work and that the course is likely to improve your chances of
getting a job. If you are offered work while on the course you will be
expected to accept the job offer.

###  Appeals

The Part-Time Education Option is an administrative scheme. However, you can [
appeal a decision ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
welfare-appeals/) to refuse you the PTEO if you have been refused because you
are considered not to be available for full-time work.

##  How to qualify for the Part-Time Education Option

There are no specific eligibility criteria for the PTEO. You can be any age
and may be unemployed for any length of time before starting a part-time
course of education.

It is not the same as the [ Back to Education Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/) or the [ Education,
Training and Development Option ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-
education/education-training-and-development-option/) .

###  Keep your jobseeker’s payment

If you are getting Jobseeker’s Allowance, Jobseeker’s Benefit or Jobseeker's
Benefit (Self-Employed) you may take up the Part-Time Education Option and
continue to get your jobseeker’s payment. Your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office must be satisfied that the course is likely to improve your
chances of getting a job.

You must continue to satisfy the [ conditions of being available for and
genuinely seeking work ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-
getting-a-jobseekers-payment/) .

###  Courses covered

You can take part in a part-time day course, evening course or early morning
course, [ distance education ](http://www.aontas.com/whatnext/9/distance-
online-flexible-and-blended-learning/) or a [ part-time course
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5afe0f-operational-guidelines-back-to-
education-allowance/#study-options) under the [ Back to Education Initiative
(BTEI) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5afe0f-operational-guidelines-back-
to-education-allowance/#the-back-to-education-allowance-scheme) or [
Springboard ](/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-
college/springboard/) . In some cases, part-time courses which run during the
normal working day will be accepted, for example, courses under the BTEI.

A wide range of subjects is available under the BTEI. For example:

  * [ Basic adult education ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5afe0f-operational-guidelines-back-to-education-allowance/#study-options)
  * Junior Certificate and Leaving Certificate subjects such as English and maths 
  * Other courses include: personal development, catering, tourism, communication, sport and leisure. 

###  Finding a course

To find out about available courses and get advice on how to get a place on a
course, you should contact [ your local ETB
](http://www.etbi.ie/etbs/directory-of-etbs/) , school or college, public
library or [ Citizens Information Centre (CIC)
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

##  Rate of Part-Time Education Option

The Part-Time Education Option does not involve any special payment or
allowance. You continue to get your Jobseeker’s Allowance or Jobseeker’s
Benefit or Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) at your usual rate and any
other secondary benefits.

##  How to apply for the Part-TimeEducation Option

All applications for the PTEO should be made on [ form PTEO1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/34303/3af7bd54650f42f3a852ec7b58545d15.pdf) . You will
be asked to provide information about your course, for example, the course
time-table.

##  Where to apply

Apply for the Part-Time Education Option at your [ Intreo Centre or Social
Welfare Branch Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

_**Page edited:** 9 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/part-time-education-
option/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Part-
Time%20Education%20Option&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/part-time-education-
option/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/part-time-education-
option/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Part-
Time%20Education%20Option&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/part-time-education-
option/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-scheme/)

The Part-Time Job Incentive (PTJI) Scheme allows certain long-term unemployed
people to take up part-time work and get a special weekly allowance instead of
their jobseeker’s payment.

1694.6316

  * [ _Part-time fee scheme for undergraduate courses_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-courses/)

The part-time fee scheme is a financial support scheme for students studying
certain part-time undergraduate courses in Ireland and abroad.

1612.0564

  * [ _Part-time work and social insurance (PRSI)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-time-work-and-social-insurance-prsi/)

This page explains how part-time work can affect your PRSI contributions.

1523.8986

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

