**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for unemployed people ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/) >
Employment services for jobseekers

#  Employment services for jobseekers

  * Who is a jobseeker? 
  * Training Support Grant 
  * Other supports for jobseekers 
  * Jobseeker’s payments and activation 
  * JobPath 
  * More information for jobseekers 

##  Who is a jobseeker?

You are a jobseeker if you are:

  * Getting [ Jobseeker’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ Signing on ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/signing-on/) for unemployment credits 
  * Unemployed, but not eligible for a social welfare payment, or 
  * Unemployed, looking for work and getting a social welfare payment. 

As a jobseeker, you can contact your [ local Intreo Centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) for
employment support, including advice about looking for work, information on
job vacancies, and income support.

People getting Jobseeker’s Benefit or Jobseeker’s Allowance are prioritised
for employment supports.

If you are getting a jobseeker’s payment, you may have to participate in an
activation programme – see ‘Jobseeker’s payments and activation’ below.

##  Training Support Grant

A [ Training Support Grant (TSG) ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/11dbee-
training-support-grant/) of up to €1,000 a year is available to people on
certain [ qualifying payments or schemes
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/0a962-operational-guidelines-training-
support-grant/#qualifying-eligibility) , including the Work Placement
Experience Programme.

It funds quick access to short-term training, including courses up to and
including QQI level 6.

You can get a TSG if your Employment Personal Adviser or Job Coach finds you
can’t start a job offer without:

  * Getting an immediate skill 
  * Getting or renewing a certification or permit. 

###  **Rules for the TSG**

Rules for getting the TSG include that the training must be:

  * [ Short-term ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/0a962-operational-guidelines-training-support-grant/#:~:text=Short%2Dterm%20training%20is%20typically%20regarded%20as%20ideally%209%20months%20but%20always%20less%20than%20one%20year.)
  * Part of your agreed personal progression plan (PPP) 
  * Linked to your activation needs (see ‘Jobseeker’s payments and activation’ below) 
  * Unavailable from the department directly 
  * Unavailable from any other state provider (such as Education Training Boards or Teagasc). 

Read more about the [ rules for getting the TSG
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/0a962-operational-guidelines-training-
support-grant/) on Gov.ie.

You must apply for a TSG through your Employment Personal Adviser or Job
Coach.

###  **International Protection and Temporary Protection**

If you are an International Protection applicant, or if you have come to
Ireland from Ukraine and are getting the Beneficiaries of Temporary Protection
weekly payment, you may be considered for the TSG.

##  Other supports for jobseekers

Jobseekers can access various services and supports, including:

###  **Group sessions with Intreo**

When you register for a jobseeker payment, you must attend a [ group
engagement session (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/44610/5d3ad8a820184b049a283e4138094f44.pdf) with other
jobseekers. At this session, you will get information on the supports
available to help you return to work.

###  **One-to-one sessions with Intreo**

Depending on your circumstances, you may be scheduled to attend one-to-one
sessions with an Employment Personal Adviser to discuss:

  * Employment opportunities 
  * Training courses 
  * Financial supports 
  * Other options which may lead to employment. 

If you are getting a jobseeker’s payment, you will get on-going appointments
to monitor your progression towards employment, training, or education.

###  **Jobs Ireland website**

The [ Jobs Ireland website ](http://www.jobsireland.ie/) lists:

  * Jobs available in Ireland and abroad 
  * Internships 
  * Employment programme vacancies. 

The Jobs Ireland website also has [ advice on preparing your CV
](https://jobsireland.ie/en-US/TipsandAdvicePage) , as well as writing a cover
letter, completing an application form, and preparing for interview.

To access the full service, you need to create a Jobs Ireland account using [
your basic MyGovID ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/egovernment/mygovid/) .

Once registered, you can upload your CV to the Jobs Ireland database, so that
employers can access it and contact you directly.

###  **Job Clubs**

Job Clubs are run by the Department of Social Protection, to support
jobseekers through a drop-in service and formal workshops.

At Job Club, you can:

  * Get help preparing your CV and cover letters 
  * Get help preparing for interview 
  * Develop an individual ‘employment action plan’ 
  * Access phone and internet services to help you with job-seeking 
  * Get up-to-date information on the local economy and job opportunities 
  * Speak with potential employers. 

You should [ contact your local Intreo Centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) for more
information on Job Clubs.

###  **Benefit of Work Estimator**

You can use the [ benefit of work estimator
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/parents-children-family/benefit-of-
work-estimator-for-jobseekers-and-one-parent-families/) on MyWelfare.ie to see
how starting work or increasing your hours could affect your social welfare
payment.

It calculates the total amount you would get if you take up full-time work
(including any Working Family Payment), and it compares this to what you are
getting in jobseeker payments (including Rent Supplement).

###  **The EURES portal**

You can find information on job opportunities throughout Europe using the [
EURES portal (European Employment Services)
](https://ec.europa.eu/eures/page/index) .

###  **Citizens Information**

You can also read our pages about:

  * [ Payments for unemployed people ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/)
  * [ Employment support schemes ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)
  * [ Becoming self-employed ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/becoming-self-employed/)
  * [ Returning to education and training ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-training/returning-to-education/)
  * [ Employment supports for people with disabilities. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-and-disability/)

##  Jobseeker’s payments and activation

If you are getting a Jobseeker’s payment, you may have to participate in an
activation programme. ‘Activation’ means the Department of Social Protection
works with you to support you back into employment.

You are expected to fully engage and use the supports offered to you during
the activation process. This can include education or training schemes, or
employment support schemes, to help you back into the workplace.

People who do not engage with the activation process can have their
jobseeker’s payment reduced, and subsequently [ be disqualified from their
payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/#ef21b9) for up to 9 weeks.

However, if you are over 62, [ you may not have to engage with the activation
process ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/older-jobseekers/) .

Read more about the [ conditions that apply to your jobseekers’ payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/) .

##  JobPath

JobPath is an employment activation programme that helps long-term jobseekers
find and keep full-time employment or self-employment.

###  **Can I apply for JobPath?**

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) selects jobseekers for JobPath on a
random basis. You cannot apply to go on JobPath.

If you spent a year on JobPath and remain unemployed 2 months after you have
finished, you become eligible for selection again.

###  **What happens if I’m selected?**

If you are selected for JobPath, you’ll be referred to a JobPath company based
on where you live.

There are 2 companies:

  1. [ Seetec ](http://www.seetec.ie/)
  2. [ Turas Nua ](http://www.turasnua.ie/) . 

You will get a personal adviser who will assess your skills, work experience,
and work goals.

The adviser will draw up a Personal Progression Plan (PPP) with you. The PPP
will include a series of activities and actions designed to help you get a
job, such as:

  * Work experience 
  * Training 
  * Other relevant supports. 

You will also get career advice, help with your CV, and support with interview
skills. You can also get advice on starting your own business.

###  **Can I keep my jobseeker’s payment?**

Yes, you keep your jobseeker's payment while on JobPath. However, your payment
may be affected if you don’t engage with the programme.

If you are registered with Jobpath, you can apply for employment support
schemes such as [ Tús
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/tus/) or [ Community Employment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/) .

Depending on your Intreo Centre, while you are on JobPath you may sign on for
your jobseeker's payment less often than before. In some situations, you may
not have to sign on at all.

###  **What if I find a job?**

The JobPath activation programme can last for a year (52 weeks).

If you find a job, the JobPath company will continue working with you while
you are in employment for up to a year. It will give you particular support
during the first few weeks of employment.

Read more about [ JobPath ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-
information/9e575c-jobpath/) on gov.ie.

##  More information for jobseekers

Find out about the [ payments available to unemployed people
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/) .

Read [ Intreo’s Guide to Employment Services and Supports (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/43969/bc0244a3e6e84f5a9e1687c12a3cdda4.pdf) .

You can also [ contact your local Intreo centre or branch office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) for
information on employment supports and job vacancies.

If you need help understanding your entitlements, you can [ contact your local
Citizens Information Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

_**Page edited:** 10 April 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/employment-
supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Employment%20services%20for%20jobseekers&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/employment-
supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Employment%20services%20for%20jobseekers&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Employment laws in Ireland_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employment-laws-in-ireland/)

Summary of the main employment legislation in Ireland.

1037.7892

  * [ _Information for younger jobseekers_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/)

Younger jobseekers must meet the same conditions as all other jobseekers but
there are some targeted supports to help them into work.

834.0255

  * [ _Supports for Ukrainians in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-ireland/supports-for-ukrainians-in-ireland/)

This page has information on organisations that are helping people who have
come to Ireland because of the war in Ukraine.

811.5981

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

