**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Case studies, checklists and worksheets ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/) > Case study: Working and claiming a
State Pension (Non-Contributory)

#  Case study: Working and claiming a State Pension (Non-Contributory)

  * Working and claiming a State Pension (Non-Contributory) 

##  Working and claiming a State Pension (Non-Contributory)

###  This case study shows the effect of work on a State Pension (Non-
Contributory), using 2024 rates

###  Case study

Joe is 67 years of age and has been claiming a State Pension (Non-
Contributory) for over a year. He gets an increase in his payment for his
wife, Jean.

Jean is 62 years old and works part-time as a bookkeeper. She earns €130 a
week (net). Net earnings are total earnings after deductions, such as [ PRSI
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-
insurance/) , superannuation and union fees.

They have no other income, but they have savings of €56,000.

Currently, Joe's pension payment is the maximum State Pension (Non-
Contributory) €441.70. This is the maximum personal rate of €266, plus the
increase for a qualified adult of €175.70.

Joe and Jean’s total weekly income is currently €571.70.

####  Changes to their circumstances

Joe has been offered some part-time work as a caretaker in a local school. If
he takes the job, his net weekly wage will be €260.

Jean is thinking of increasing the number of hours she works. Her new net
weekly income would be €206.

Joe wants to know how his State Pension (Non-Contributory) will be affected if
he starts work in the local school and Jean increases the number of days she
works.

####  Joe and Jean's new assessable means

The table below shows how to calculate Joe and Jean’s new weekly income:

**Step 1: Find Joe and Jean’s total assessable income** Joe's assessable
income from work (see note 1 below): €60  **Add** Jean's assessable income
from work (see note 2): €6  **Add** income from savings (see note 3): €16
Total: **** €82  
---  
**Step 2: Calculate 50% (half) of Joe and Jean’s total assessable means** €82
divided by 2 = €41 (see note 4 below)  So, the total assessable weekly means
**** is **€41** .  
**Step 3: Find Joe’s new weekly rate of State Pension (Non Contributory)** As
the couple have weekly means of €41, Joe's personal rate of pension changes to
€253.30 (see note 5 below).  His weekly increase for a qualified adult changes
to €167.40.  So, Joe’s new weekly State Pension (Non-Contributory) is
**€420.90** .  
**Step 4: Find the couple’s new total weekly income** Joe's State Pension
(Non-Contributory): €420.90  Add Joe’s weekly income from work: €260  Add
Jean’s weekly income from work: €206  The couple’s new total weekly income
will be €886.90.  
  
###  **Note 1: Joe's assessable income from work**

Joe will earn €260 (net) per week. He can earn up to €200 per week from
employment [ without it affecting his State Pension (Non-contributory)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/#c25dd5) .

As €200 is not taken into account for the means test, Joe’s assessable income
from work is €60.

###  **Note 2: Jean’s assessable income from work**

Jean will earn €206 (net) per week. As a spouse, she can earn up to €200 per
week [ without it affecting Joe’s State Pension (Non-contributory)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/#c25dd5) .

As €200 is not taken into account for the means test, Jean's assessable income
from work is €6.

###  **Note 3: Income from savings for a couple**

Joe and Jean’s income from savings is calculated as follows:

First €40,000  |  Nil   
---|---  
Next €20,000  |  €1 per €1,000 per week   
Next €20,000  |  €2 per €1,000 per week   
Excess €80,000  |  €4 per €1,000 per week   
  
John and Jean have savings of €56,000. The first €40,000 is not taken into
account for the means test, but the remaining €16,000 is taken into account.
So, their assessable income from savings is €16.

###  Note 4

If you are married, in a civil partnership, or cohabiting, your total means as
a couple are halved. Read more about [ assessing the means of a couple for
social assistance payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-
couple/) .

###  Note 5

Joe's new personal rate of State Pension (Non-Contributory) is €253.50. He
also gets an extra amount or increase of €167.40 for Jean as a qualified
adult. See [ the rates of pension paid after means are assessed
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/6aec4d-current-rates-of-payment-for-
social-welfare-payments-sw19/) .

_**Page edited:** 5 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
working-and-claiming-a-state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Case%20study%3A%20Working%20and%20claiming%20a%20State%20Pension%20%20%28Non-
Contributory%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
working-and-claiming-a-state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
working-and-claiming-a-state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Case%20study%3A%20Working%20and%20claiming%20a%20State%20Pension%20%20%28Non-
Contributory%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
working-and-claiming-a-state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet: State Pension (Non-Contributory) and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-state-pension-non-contributory-and-income-from-work/)

Use this worksheet to find out how your earnings from employment will affect
your State Pension (Non-Contributory).

3242.1465

  * [ _State Pension (Non-Contributory)_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)

The State Pension (Non-Contributory), previously called the Old Age Non-
Contributory Pension, is a means-tested payment for people in Ireland aged 66
and over.

2985.217

  * [ _Deferring your State Pension (Contributory)_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/deferring-your-state-pension-contributory/)

You can start to claim your State Pension (Contributory) at any age between 66
and 70. This page explains who can defer (delay) their State Pension
(Contributory), rates for different age groups, and how to apply.

2323.7148

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

