**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for older and retired people ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/) > Centenarian Bounty

#  Centenarian Bounty

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Centenarian Bounty is a national award made by the Irish president to
people who have reached 100 years of age.

The Centenarian Bounty is usually awarded on behalf of the President by a
local member of the clergy or friend of the centenarian. A letter of
congratulations signed by the President accompanies the award. The centenarian
can also request that the letter and the President's bounty be sent directly
to themselves without a presentation ceremony.

The President has also marks the birthday of each person resident in Ireland
over the age of 100 years. On their 101st and every birthday after that, the
person receives a special commemorative coin in a presentation box, along with
a congratulatory letter signed by the President. A new coin is designed for
each year.

##  Rules

The Centenarian Bounty is paid to all Irish nationals and foreign nationals
resident in Ireland on their 100th birthday. Irish citizens born in the island
of Ireland who have reached 100 and are living outside the State are also
eligible for the Bounty.

The Bounty is not paid if a person reaches their 100th birthday but dies
before the application process completed. The Bounty cannot be paid to the
estate of a deceased person.

##  Rates

You will receive €2,540 and a congratulatory letter signed by the President on
your 100th birthday.

You will also get a commemorative coin and a congratulatory letter from the
President on your 101st and every birthday after that.

##  How to apply

###  People living in Ireland and getting an Irish social welfare payment

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) automatically forwards information
about people who are about to reach 100 and who are getting DSP pensions to
the office of the President. The office of the President then makes the award
directly to the individual.

###  People living in Ireland but not getting an Irish social welfare payment

You should forward information about people (Irish nationals and foreign
nationals) resident in Ireland who are not receiving a social welfare pension
to the Pensions Section in the Department of Social Protection. The Department
will arrange for a social welfare inspector to verify the information. This
may involve a visit by the inspector. Once it has been verified that the
person is eligible for the bounty, the award will be made to them.

###  People not living in Ireland

You should forward information about Irish citizens born in the island of
Ireland and resident outside the State, using the [ application form for
Centenarian Bounty (pdf)
](https://www.dfa.ie/media/dfa/alldfawebsitemedia/ourrolesandpolicies/theirishabroad/CENTENARIAN-
BOUNTY-FORM_2016.pdf) to the person's nearest Irish diplomatic mission or the
Department of Foreign Affairs (see 'Where to apply' below). Once it has been
verified that the person is eligible, the award will be made to them.  

##  Where to apply

###  Centenarian Bounty

Department of Foreign Affairs  
80 St Stephen’s Green  
Dublin 2

**Tel:** (01) 408 2149

If you are living abroad contact your nearest diplomatic mission or the Irish
Abroad Unit (Centenarian Bounty Scheme) in the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade.

###  Irish Abroad Unit

Department of Foreign Affairs

80 St Stephen's Green  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Tel:** \+ 353 1 408 2149

**Homepage:** [ https://www.dfa.ie/ ](https://www.dfa.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 20 July 2021 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/centenarians-
bounty/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Centenarian%20Bounty&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/centenarians-
bounty/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/centenarians-
bounty/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Centenarian%20Bounty&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/centenarians-
bounty/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

932.0092

  * [ _Living together and marriage: what are the legal differences?_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-couples/legal-differences-between-cohabitation-and-marriage/)

If your relationship ends, your rights can depend on whether you and your
partner are married or not. Find out more.

815.60736

  * [ _Social welfare payments and living on a specified island_ ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-increase/)

If you are getting a certain social welfare payment and living on a specified
island off the coast of Ireland, you can get an increase in your social
welfare payment .

775.7635

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

