**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for unemployed people ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/) >
Jobseeker's Allowance

#  Jobseeker's Allowance

  * What is Jobseeker's Allowance? 
  * How to qualify for Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Rate of Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * How to apply for Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Where to apply for Jobseeker's Allowance 

##  What is Jobseeker's Allowance?

Jobseeker's Allowance is a payment to people who are unemployed. If you are
unemployed, you can apply for Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) or [ Jobseeker's
Benefit (JB) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) .

You can apply for JA, if you have been on JB and your payment has ended. You
can also apply for JA, if you are only entitled to a reduced rate of JB and
would be better off on JA (this is known as [ Optional JA
](jobseekers_benefit.en.html#part7) .)

Jobseeker’s Allowance is a means-tested payment, so your income must be below
a certain amount to get JA.

If you are parenting alone, you can apply for the [ Jobseeker’s Transitional
payment (JST) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-
payment/) . It provides support to lone parents who have young children aged
between 7 and 13.

##  How to qualify for Jobseeker's Allowance

To get JA, you must be aged 18 or over and under 66. You must also:

  * Be fully unemployed (or work for 3 days a week or less) 
  * Be available for full-time work and genuinely seeking work 
  * Be capable of work 
  * Pass a [ means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/)
  * Meet the [ habitual residence condition ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-residence-condition/)

You can get more information on [ the conditions for getting a jobseeker's
payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-
payment/) and [ employment services for jobseekers ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/) .

[ There are some special provisions for older jobseekers ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/older-jobseekers/) and for [ pregnant women
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-
payments/) .

###  Jobseeker's Allowance and work

To get Jobseeker’s Allowance you must be looking for full-time work – and you
must be able to show proof of this to the DSP.

If you are working 3 days a week or less, you may get JA for the days when you
do not work. However, you must show that you are still trying to get full-time
work.

If your employer reduces your days at work to 3 days a week or less, you may
get JA for the other days.

You must still meet the other conditions that apply to JA, such as pass the
means test. Income from work will affect the amount of JA you get.

If you have been getting long-term JA (for over 15 months or over 390 days)
and you take up part-time work for under 24 hours a week, you can apply for
the [ Part-time Job Incentive Scheme (PTJI). ](/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-scheme/) This scheme allows
you to work part-time and get a special weekly allowance instead of your
jobseeker’s payment.

Find out more in our document about [ how income from work is assessed for
Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-
test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/) .

If you have children and stop claiming JA when you start work, you can apply
for a [ Back to Work Family Dividend ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-work-family-dividend/) .

You can use the [ Benefit of Work Estimator
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/parents-children-family/benefit-of-
work-estimator-for-jobseekers-and-one-parent-families/) to find out how
starting work could affect your income. It works out the total amount you will
get if you take up full-time work and compares this to your jobseeker’s
payment.

**Self-employment and Jobseeker's Allowance**

If you are self-employed, you may be entitled to JA, depending on your income
from your business. You can find out more in our document about [ self-
employment and unemployment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/self-
employed-and-unemployment/) . Self-employed farmers on a low income can apply
for [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) .

**Artists and Jobseeker's Allowance**

If you are a professional artist on JA, you can be exempt from l [ abour
market activation ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/)
for the first year that you are out of work. This means that you do not have
to show that you are looking for work. It allows professional artists who are
getting JA to focus on their artistic work. The Department of Social
Protection (DSP) provides a [ full list of professional art forms covered
(pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/27311/cbcb43e3c0144fa8bb145fe997f2324b.pdf#page=1)
.

###  Means test

Your income must be below a certain level to get Jobseeker’s Allowance.

To find out if your income is low enough to qualify for Jobseeker’s Allowance,
the DSP does a means test.

The means test looks at your income, savings, investments and property, but
not your own home. It includes [ your spouse’s, civil partner’s or
_cohabitant's_ income ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-
test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-couple/) . (A
cohabitant is a person living in an intimate and committed relationship with a
person of the same or opposite sex who is not that person’s spouse, civil
partner, or a close relative.) However, [ some income is not be taken into
account ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-
social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-
test/) in the means test.

To find your rate of Jobseeker’s Allowance, the DSP will deduct your total
means from the maximum payment for your household.

If your partner works or is taking part in Tús, their earnings are assessed in
the same way as earnings from any part-time work or casual work. Find out more
in our document about [ work and Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/) .

If your partner or cohabitant started a [ Community Employment (CE)
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-
schemes/community-employment-scheme/) scheme **before 1 January 2023** , their
earnings from the scheme are assessed in the same way as earnings from part-
time work. If they start CE in 2023, your means will be halved, you can find
more about [ how CE is assesssed in the means test for Jobseeker's Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/) .

A _limitation_ applies, which means that if you are claiming JA and your
partner is getting certain social welfare payments, the total amount paid to
you as a couple cannot be more than the maximum amount for one person
(including any dependants) on one social welfare payment.

Find out more in our page about [ the means test for Jobseeker’s Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/) .

If you are **24 or under** and living with a parent (or a step-parent) in the
family home, the JA means test will assess some of your parents’ income. Find
out more in our document about [ how living with your parents is assessed in
the means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-
for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-jobseekers-
allowance/) .

###  Disqualification and reduction in payment

You may not be entitled to JA in certain situations. This is known as being
_disqualified_ . You could be disqualified from getting JA for up to 9 weeks
if you:

  * Left work voluntarily and without just cause 
  * Lost your job through misconduct 
  * Refused an offer of suitable employment or training and you have been on a penalty rate of JA for at least 21 days 

Your payment can be reduced if you do not attend meetings requested by the DSP
or if you do not participate in an appropriate employment support scheme, work
experience or training (see also ‘Penalty rates’ below).

Read more in our document about [ sanctions that may apply if you do not
fulfil the conditions of your jobseeker's payment ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/) .

###  Students

If you have just left school, you cannot get Jobseeker's Allowance. To get
Jobseeker's Allowance you must be at least 18 and be out of school for 3
months. The [ 3 month disqualification rule
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/1a5134-operational-guidelines-jobseekers-
allowance/#ja-disqualification-course-of-study) does not apply to Youthreach
participants.

If you are a third-level student studying full-time, you cannot claim the dole
(JA or JB). You cannot sign on outside term-time, such as during the summer
holidays (unless [ you are a mature student
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Jobseekers-Allowance.aspx#condavailwork) ).
However, once you have finished college permanently you can claim a
jobseeker's payment if you cannot find work. This is also the case if you
leave college without finishing your course.

###  Short-term work or training

The DSP has a fast-tracking system for people who sign off JA to take up work
for a short period (of up to 12 weeks) or to go on a short training course
(lasting up to 12 weeks).

You will get your payment again without delay.

You must inform your Intreo Centre or local Social Welfare branch office
before you start work or training.

Your [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/rent-supplement/) can also be suspended for up to 12 weeks.

##  Rate of Jobseeker's Allowance

**Weekly** **Jobseeker’s Allowance rate 2024**

**Age** |  **Maximum personal rate** |  **Increase for an adult dependant** |  **Increase for a child dependant**  
---|---|---|---  
**Aged 25 and over** |  €232  |  €154  |  Child aged under 12  €46 (full rate), €23 (half rate)  Child aged 12 and over  €54 (full rate), €27 (half rate)   
**Aged 18-24 and living independently*** |  €232  |  €154   
**Aged 18-24 and not living independently** |  €141.70  |  €141.70  |  People aged 18-24 with children qualify for the maximum personal rate of €232   
  
* Jobseeker’s Allowance for people aged under 25 is €232, only if the person is living independently and getting a state housing support such as [ Rent Supplement ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) , [ Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-scheme/) or [ Housing Assistance Payment (HAP ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/housing-assistance-payment/) ). 

Reduced personal and qualified adult rates of Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) for
people between 18 and 24 do not apply to:

  * People with dependent children 
  * People transferring from Disability Allowance to JA 
  * People who were in the care of the Child and Family Agency during the 12 months before reaching 18. 

If you were getting an age-related reduced rate of JA and you take part in a
course of education, training or an employment support scheme the appropriate
personal rate of payment applicable to that course or scheme will apply as
long as you are aged under 25. When you complete the course you will go back
to your previous age-related JA rate.

All Back to Education Allowance (BTEA) participants aged under 25 who were
getting a reduced age-related Jobseeker’s Allowance payment, get a maximum
BTEA rate of €232 per week. Any means you have are deducted from this rate.

###  Penalty rates

Your payment can be reduced if you do not attend meetings when the DSP asks
you to. It can also be reduced if you do not take part in an appropriate
employment support scheme, work experience or training.

You can find out more in our document about penalties for not meeting [ the
conditions of your jobseeker's payment. ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/)

###  Payments for dependants

If you qualify for JA, you get an amount for yourself, which is called the
personal rate of payment. You may also get an increase in your payment for an
[ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-
social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-
for-an-adult-dependant/) and [ any child dependants ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) .

####  **Child dependants**

A _child dependant_ is usually a child up to 18 years of age who lives with
you. The extra payment for a child dependant is called an Increase for a
Qualified Child (IQC).

If you have been getting Jobseeker’s Allowance for at least 156 days and your
child is in full-time education, an IQC will be paid up to 22 years of age or
up to the end of the academic year in which he or she reaches 22.

If you and your partner are both getting a social welfare payment, you will
each get a half-rate IQC.

####  **Adult dependants**

You may get an Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA) for an _adult dependant_
(this is usually your spouse or partner).

You can claim an increase for your partner if they started their CE scheme
before 1 January 2023 or they they are taking part [ Tús
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/tus/)
. The means test will assess their income from the scheme in the same way as
income from a job where they pay PRSI.

If your partner started a CE scheme in 2023, you cannot claim an increase in
your payment for them. It will include full rate increases for your child
dependants. Half of your joint income will be assessed in the means test.

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is getting a social welfare
payment in his or her own right (with some exceptions) or is on a Further
Education and Training (FET) course or VTOS course and getting an allowance
you will not get an IQA, but you will get a half-rate increase for any
qualified children.

If you live with a person aged 16 or over who is caring for your child
dependant, you may be able to get an IQA for them. To apply for this IQA, you
must be single, widowed, divorced, separated, a former civil partner or not
living with your civil partner.

###  Getting paid

You collect your JA payment every week, from your nearest post office. You
must bring valid photo ID with you to collect it. This can be your:

  * [ Public Services Card ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/)
  * Driving licence 
  * Passport 
  * Irish Residence Permit card 
  * National Identity Card (for EU/EEA citizens) 

You may have to show your photo ID to get the payment.

###  Other benefits

If you are getting JA, you may also get:

  * [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) \- a payment that helps with the cost of your rent. 
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/) \- paid between October and April to help with cost of fuel. You can get it if you have been getting JA for 312 days and satisfy the qualifying conditions. Days of unemployment on JB count towards the 312 days if you went straight from JB onto JA without a break. 
  * [ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/) \- to help with the cost of uniforms and footwear shoes for children who are attending going to school 
  * [ Medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) \- if your income is below a certain level 

You do **not** qualify for the [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/) or [ Free
Travel ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) with
JA.

##  How to apply for Jobseeker's Allowance

You should apply for Jobseeker's Allowance the first day you become
unemployed. It is important to apply on the first day you become unemployed
because you will not get paid for the first 3 days of your claim.

If you [ make a late claim ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/making-a-late-claim/) , it may be
backdated if you provide good evidence for the delay.

More information is available in our document about [ signing on for the first
time ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/signing-on/) .

If you think you have been wrongly refused Jobseeker's Allowance you can [
appeal the decision to the Social Welfare Appeals Office ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/) .

**Online applications**

You can apply for JA online at [ mywelfare.ie
](https://www.mywelfare.ie/Account/Login) .

After you log in, it will ask you to give some personal and financial
information, as well as details of your employment, training and education
history. It will also ask you to upload or post any supporting documents that
are needed.

To apply online, you must have a verified [ MyGovID account
](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/GettingStarted) .

**Applying using a paper form**

You can get a Jobseekers's Allowance application form UP1 at your Intreo
Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office.

If you are making a repeat claim (less than 6 months since your last claim)
you fill in form [ UP6 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/37365/2de1c35ba1ab498f819ee65731aa4086.pdf) .

You can get help with filling in your application form at your Intreo Centre,
Social Welfare Branch Office or [ Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

##  Where to apply for Jobseeker's Allowance

You can apply for JA:

  * Online at [ MyWelfare.ie ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/)
  * In person at your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office. ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/)

Applications should be made either online or by post where possible.

_**Page edited:** 2 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Jobseeker%27s%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Jobseeker%27s%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Means test for Jobseeker's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/)

To get Jobseeker's Allowance you must satisfy a means test. A means test
examines all your sources of income. However, some income is not included when
calculating your means.

856.1902

  * [ _Payment for people who retire at 65_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/payment-for-people-retired-at-65/)

If you retire at 65, you may qualify for a benefit payment until you reach 66.
The payment is similar to Jobseeker’s Benefit, but you don’t need to be
looking for work or sign on at your local Intreo centre.

810.03973

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

805.0276

  * [ _Professional artists on Jobseekers Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance-professional-artists/)

A scheme for professional artists on Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) that allows
you to focus on your artistic work and develop your portfolio.

781.111

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

