**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Social assistance payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-assistance-payments/) > Social assistance in Ireland

#  Social assistance in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

Social assistance payments are for people who do not have enough [ PRSI
contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) to qualify for the equivalent social
insurance payments. An example would be a person who becomes unemployed,
applies for Jobseeker's Benefit but fails to qualify because he or she has
insufficient PRSI contributions. He or she can instead apply for Jobseeker's
Allowance, which is a similar payment but is not based on the number of PRSI
contributions paid. Jobseeker's Benefit is a social insurance payment but
Jobseeker's Allowance is a social assistance payment.

However, to get a social assistance payment you must be [ habitually resident
in Ireland ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-
payments/habitual-residence-condition/) and you must pass a [ means test
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/means-test/) .

##  Rules

The rules governing social welfare assistance payments are set out in
legislation and/or administrative guidelines. Most of the guidelines are now
available on the [ Department of Social Protection's (DSP) website
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-employment-affairs-and-
social-protection/) .

In general you cannot get two social assistance payments (except for [ Carer's
Allowance which can be paid at a half rate with another social welfare payment
](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/) ). If you think you
might qualify for more than one payment, you generally have to choose the one
that is of most benefit to you.

There are a number of social assistance payments. You may qualify for one
depending on your circumstances:

[ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/) is paid to people aged 18 or over and unemployed.

[ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) (OFP) is paid to men and women who are bringing
children up without the support of a partner.

[ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) is an
income support scheme for farmers. You do not need to be available for work to
qualify for Farm Assist.

[ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension
](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-
pension/) is paid to widows, widowers and surviving civil partners who do not
have dependent children.

[ Guardian's Payment (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-
benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/) is paid to an orphan's guardian up to
the orphan's 18th birthday or 22nd birthday if he or she is in full-time
education.

[ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) is paid to
people who are looking after someone who is in need of full-time care and
attention because of age, physical or learning disability or illness,
including mental illness.

[ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) is paid to people that have no little or
no income.

[ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-non-contributory/) is paid to people when they reach 66
years of age.

[ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-
pension/) is paid to blind and visually impaired people.

[ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/) is paid to people with a disability who are aged 16 or over and
under age 66.

Deserted Wife's Allowance is paid to women who were deserted by their husband
and have no dependent children. This scheme was closed to new applications in
January 1997.

If you qualify for a social assistance payment you may qualify for [
additional social welfare benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/) .

For most social assistance payments, decisions about your entitlement are made
by Deciding Officers. Deciding Officers are DSP officials appointed under the
social welfare legislation.

If you are not happy with a decision by the Department of Social Protection,
you have a right to appeal decisions in relation to payments that are based in
legislation. Appeals are made to the Social Welfare Appeals Office, an
independent statutory body. [ Find out how to appeal a decision of the
Department of Social Protection ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/) .  

##  Rates

###  Rates of payment and dependants

Social welfare payments are divided into a payment for you, the claimant,
known as the _personal rate_ of payment, and a payment for any [ adult
dependants ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-
adult-dependant/) and [ child dependants ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-
your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) . The [ SW 19 Rates of Payment Booklet
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/6aec4d-current-rates-of-payment-for-
social-welfare-payments-sw19/) , published by the Department of Social
Protection every year, details the amount of money payable for each scheme and
the amount that will be awarded to your dependants.  

##  How to apply

If you wish to apply for a social welfare payment, you should contact your [
Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) or [
Citizens Information Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) for an
application form and an information leaflet. Fill out the correct application
form and return it to the Department of Social Protection. The return address
is printed on the application form.  

_**Page edited:** 5 February 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/social-
assistance-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20assistance%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/social-
assistance-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/social-
assistance-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20assistance%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/social-
assistance-in-ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Assessing the means of a couple for social assistance payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-couple/)

Describes how the means of a couple are assessed for social assistance (means-
tested payments).

2940.3184

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

1803.2897

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

1717.6017

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

