**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Carers' payments ](/en/social-welfare/carers/) > Half-rate Carer's Allowance

#  Half-rate Carer's Allowance

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you are getting certain social welfare payments and you are providing full-
time care and attention to another person, you can keep your main social
welfare payment and get a half-rate Carer’s Allowance as well.

If you are in one of the following situations you may qualify for half-rate
Carer's Allowance:

  * **Already getting Carer's Allowance but also meet the qualifying criteria for another social welfare payment**

If you are getting Carer's Allowance and you also meet the qualifying
conditions for another social welfare payment (for example, a State pension)
you should apply for the other payment. If you qualify for the other payment
you will be paid it in full and keep half your Carer’s Allowance payment as
well. (For a list of social welfare payments paid with half-rate Carer's
Allowance - see 'Rules' below)

If you are currently getting Carer’s Allowance and your spouse, civil partner
or cohabitant is claiming another social welfare payment (for example,
Jobseeker’s Allowance), your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant may claim an
increase in their social welfare payment for you as a qualified adult and your
Carer’s Allowance will be reduced by 50%. This can only be done with your
consent but it may increase your total household income.

  * **Changed from another social welfare payment to get Carer's Allowance**

If you were on another social welfare payment before claiming Carer's
Allowance, you may get your original payment reinstated and also get half-rate
Carer's Allowance, if you continue to meet the qualifying conditions for both
schemes. (For a list of social welfare payments payable with half-rate Carer's
Allowance - see 'Rules' below)

  * **Caring for someone and being claimed for by a spouse, civil partner or cohabitant**

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is claiming for you as a qualified
adult on their payment and you are providing full-time care to another person,
you can apply for half-rate Carer's Allowance and keep your current [ Increase
for a Qualified Adult ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) in full.

  * **Getting a social welfare payment other than Carer's Allowance and caring for someone**

If you are getting one of the social welfare payments payable with half-rate
Carer's Allowance (see 'Rules' below) and caring for someone, you may keep
your social welfare payment and qualify for half-rate Carer’s Allowance.

###  People parenting alone

People parenting alone, who meet the qualifying criteria for Carer's
Allowance, may qualify for both One-Parent Family Payment (OFP) and half-rate
Carer’s Allowance (CA). If your youngest child is aged between 7 and 15
inclusive, you must qualify for Carer's Allowance to continue to qualify for
OFP. You will also get an Increase for a Qualified Child (IQC) for any other
children in your family until they reach 18 (or 22 if in full-time education)
while you are getting CA and OFP. (See our page on [ One-Parent Family Payment
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) for
more information on other exceptions to the age limits.)

##  Rules

You must meet the qualifying criteria for Carer’s Allowance. For example, the
person you are caring for must be so incapacitated as to require full-time
care and attention and you must satisfy a means test. There is more
information in our page about [ Carer’s Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) .

If you satisfy the conditions for Carer’s Allowance, it will be awarded at 50%
of the rate that would apply if you were not getting any other payment. You
will also be eligible for the [ Carer's Support Grant ](/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-support-grant/) and a [ Free Travel Pass ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) . You may also be eligible
for the [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-
welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/) .

The half-rate Carer’s Allowance is disregarded in the means test for [ Fuel
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
.

###  You can get half-rate Carer’s Allowance with the following weekly social
welfare payments:

  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) and State Pension (Contributory) Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Deserted Wife's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/)
  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) and Invalidity Pension Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/) and Illness Benefit Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Injury Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/) and Injury Benefit Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Death Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)
  * [ Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/)
  * [ Partial Capacity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/partial-capacity-benefit/)
  * [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)
  * [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/)
  * [ Parent's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/)
  * [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/)
  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/) and State Pension (Non-Contributory) Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/) and Blind Pension Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * [ Deserted Wife's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) and Disability Allowance Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Incapacity Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disablement-benefit/) and Incapacity Supplement Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) and Farm Assist Increase for a Qualified Adult 

###  You cannot get half-rate Carer’s Allowance with the following social
welfare payments:

  * [ Basic Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) (SWA) and SWA Increase for a Qualified Adult 
  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)
  * [ Benefit for people who retire at 65 ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/payment-for-people-retired-at-65/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)
  * [ Back to Education ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/)
  * [ Carer’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/)

You cannot get Jobseeker's Benefit (JB) or Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) and
half-rate Carer's Allowance because you must be actively seeking employment
and be available to take up employment to qualify for JA and JB. However, you
may qualify for half-rate Carer's Allowance if your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant is getting JA or JB and claiming for you as a [ qualified adult
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-
dependant/) .

##  Rates

If you satisfy the conditions for Carer’s Allowance it will be awarded at 50%
of the rate that would apply if you were not getting any other payment.

**Maximum** **half-rate Carer’s Allowance rates 2024**

**Half-rate Carer’s Allowance** |  **Under 66** |  **Age 66 and over**  
---|---|---  
Caring for one person  |  €124  |  €143   
Caring for two or more  |  €186  |  €214.50   
  
Any increase you may be entitled to, for example, an [ increase for a
qualified child ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-
social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-
dependant/) , living alone and living on an offshore island will be paid with
your main social welfare payment and **not** with the half-rate Carer’s
Allowance.

###  Change of circumstance

You may continue to be regarded as providing full-time care and attention if
you or the person being cared for is undergoing medical or other treatment in
a hospital or other institution for a period not longer than 13 weeks. If you
are getting half-rate Carer’s Allowance for a child, it can be paid for up to
6 months if the child is in hospital.

Half-rate Carer's Allowance continues to be paid for a period of 12 weeks if
the person being cared for moves permanently into a residential care or
nursing home. You must contact the Carer's Allowance Section with the date of
the permanent move.

Carer's Allowance continues to be paid for 12 weeks after the death of the
person being cared for.  

##  How to apply

You apply on the standard Carer’s Allowance form.

To apply fill in an [ application form for Carer's Allowance (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/19942/5c857d64529f42b78db3dc4afe8feb5a.pdf) . You can
also contact your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office for a copy of
this form.

Send the completed application form with the relevant certificates to Carer's
Allowance Section at the Department of Social Protection - see 'Where to
apply' below.

##  Where to apply

###  Carer's Allowance Section

Department of Social Protection

Social Welfare Services Office  
Government Buildings  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
Ireland

**Tel:** (043) 334 0000 or 0818 927 770

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/2432ba-carers-allowance/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/2432ba-carers-allowance/)

**Email:** [ Carersallowance@welfare.ie ](mailto:Carersallowance@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 10 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Half-
rate%20Carer%27s%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Half-
rate%20Carer%27s%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Claiming an extra half-rate social welfare payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/)

It is generally only possible to claim one social welfare assistance or
insurance based payment at a time. However, in certain circumstances you may
qualify for your social welfare payment and half of another payment. Find out
more.

2539.1978

  * [ _How parents' income can affect Supplementary Welfare Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-supplementary-welfare-allowance/)

Your parents' income may be taken into account when you apply for
Supplementary Welfare Allowance. Find out how the ‘benefit and privilege’ you
get from living with your parents is assessed.

1276.8445

  * [ _Blind Welfare Allowance_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-people-with-disabilities/blind-welfare-allowance/)

A means tested supplementary payment made to certain people who are blind or
visually impaired.

1253.8319

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

