**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Extra social welfare benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/) > Extra social welfare benefits

#  Extra social welfare benefits

  * Information 

##  Information

If you are getting a social welfare payment from the Department of Social
Protection, you may be entitled to additional or extra benefits depending on
your personal circumstances.

In some cases, you can get a benefit even if you are not getting a social
welfare payment. For example, everyone over 66 is entitled to avail of the
Free Travel Scheme.

To get an extra benefit you must satisfy the qualifying criteria. For example,
to get the Living Alone Increase you must be getting a certain social welfare
payment and be living alone.

In some cases you automatically get an additional benefit. For example, if you
get Invalidity Pension you automatically get free travel. However, for most
additional benefits you must apply separately.

You may be entitled to the following additional social welfare benefits:

[ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-
allowance/) is an allowance that provides help with the cost of fuel to people
who are dependent on long-term social welfare payments.

[ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/household-benefits-package/) is a package of benefits that provides
financial assistance with the cost of some household utilities. It includes an
Electricity or Gas Allowance and a Free Television Licence.

[ Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/) consists of a basic payment, called Supplementary Welfare
Allowance, and other financial supplements for certain expenses you may not be
able to meet, including emergency situations. These include [ Rent Supplement
](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) , [ Back
to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/) , and [ Heating
Supplements ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/diet-and-
heating-supplements/) .

[ Free Travel Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-
travel/) allows people on certain social welfare payments to access public
transport services for free. If you live on a specified island off the Irish
coast you can access certain private transport services.

[ Telephone Support Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/telephone-support-allowance/) is an allowance for people on certain
social welfare payments who are also getting both the Living Alone Increase
and the Fuel Allowance. It aims to help those living alone with the cost of
communications and/or home alert security systems.

[ Living Alone Increase ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/living-alone-allowance/) is a supplementary payment for people
getting certain social welfare payments who are living alone.

[ Island Increase ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-
increase/) is a supplementary payment for people getting certain social
welfare payments and living on specified islands off the coast of Ireland.

_**Page edited:** 6 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Extra%20social%20welfare%20benefits&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Extra%20social%20welfare%20benefits&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Claiming an extra half-rate social welfare payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/)

It is generally only possible to claim one social welfare assistance or
insurance based payment at a time. However, in certain circumstances you may
qualify for your social welfare payment and half of another payment. Find out
more.

2046.0873

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

1549.1058

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

1487.5319

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

