**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/) > Social
welfare payments following a death

#  Social welfare payments following a death

  * Introduction 
  * Death of the person claiming a social welfare payment 
  * Death of a dependant 
  * Where a person being cared for dies 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

Some social welfare payments can continue after someone dies. Here we list the
payments that can continue to be paid following a death and when they are
paid. The Department of Social Protection has [ guidelines on payments after
the death of a claimant or a dependant
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/847761-recently-bereaved/#if-the-deceased-
was-in-receipt-of-a-pension-or-payment-from-the-department) .

##  Death of the person claiming a social welfare payment

When someone who was getting a social welfare payment dies, their spouse,
civil partner or cohabitant may get 6 weeks of this payment after the death.
It will be paid at the same weekly rate your late spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant was getting.

The following payments can be paid for 6 weeks after death:

  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/) or [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
  * [ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) or [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/)
  * [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/)
  * [ Injury Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/) or [ Incapacity Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)
  * [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/)
  * [ Back to Work Family Dividend ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/back-to-work-family-dividend/)

To qualify, your spouse’s, civil partner’s or cohabitant’s social welfare
payment must have included a payment for you ( [ an Increase for a Qualified
Adult ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-
adult-dependant/) ) or you are getting one of the payments listed above in
your own right.

In all cases you must inform the Department of Social Protection of the death
of the person claiming the payment.

##  Death of a dependant

###  Death of an adult dependant

If you are getting a social welfare payment that includes a payment (Increase
for a Qualified Adult) for your late spouse, civil partner or cohabitant, you
will continue to get the same rate of payment for 6 weeks after their death.

###  Death of a child dependant

If your child dies, the [ Increase for a Qualified Child (IQC) ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) on your
social welfare payment will continue for 6 weeks, if the child was included in
your payment. Contact the section of the Department of Social Protection
responsible for your payment.

Where there is one qualified child on a [ One-Parent Family Payment (OFP)
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) and
that child dies, the OFP and IQC will continue for 6 weeks.

##  Where a person being cared for dies

Payment of [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/)
(full or half-rate) continues to be made for 12 weeks after the death of the
person you were caring for. Payment of [ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) continues to be made for 6 weeks after the
death of the person you were caring for.

If you are getting Carer’s Allowance (full or half-rate) on behalf of a
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant and that person dies, you can continue to
get Carer's Allowance for 12 weeks plus any of the payments listed above (if
in payment to that person) for 6 weeks after the date of death. If you were
getting Carer’s Benefit, you continue to get it for 6 weeks and any payments
your spouse or partner was getting.

[ Domiciliary Care Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/) continues to be paid for 3 months in
cases where the child being cared for has died.

##  Rates

You will be paid at the same weekly rate that was in payment before the death.

##  How to apply

To apply for a payment after a death, you should contact the section
responsible for the payment within the Department of Social Protection, as
soon as possible following the death. (For example, if the person who died was
getting a State Pension, you need to get in touch with the Pension Section of
the Department). Staff in your [ local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch
Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) can
advise if you are not sure where to contact.

Enclose the death certificate (if available) or a death notice from a
newspaper with your application. A cheque will be sent to you. Keep your own
record of the pension claim/reference number for future reference.

_**Page edited:** 5 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/social-welfare-payments-following-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20welfare%20payments%20following%20a%20death&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/social-welfare-payments-following-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/social-welfare-payments-following-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20welfare%20payments%20following%20a%20death&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/social-welfare-payments-following-a-
death/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Applying for social welfare payments and services online_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

2428.8645

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2369.7686

  * [ _Capital and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/)

Capital for Irish social welfare purposes includes property, savings and
investments. Find out how to assess income from capital for social welfare
payments.

2296.007

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

