**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Case studies, checklists and worksheets ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/) > Worksheet: Jobseeker's Allowance
and income from work

#  Worksheet: Jobseeker's Allowance and income from work

  * Worksheet 
  * Extra information: How to find your weekly means from work 
  * Extra information: How to find your spouse's, civil partner's or cohabitant's weekly means from work 

This worksheet aims to help you find out how taking up part-time or casual
work will affect your weekly Jobseeker's Allowance.

Income from work is assessed as means and can affect your Jobseeker's
Allowance payment. Other sources of income or means can also affect your
Jobseeker's Allowance, for example, [ maintenance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-
social-welfare-payments/) , [ benefit and privilege ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-jobseekers-allowance/) , cash income
and [ capital ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-
social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-
welfare-payments/) (including savings and investments). In this worksheet we
are only looking at [ how income from work can affect your payment
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/) .

##  Worksheet

A person is entitled to Jobseeker's Allowance (JA) only for periods of
unemployment. You must be unemployed for at least 4 days in a period of 7
consecutive days to get JA. More information on the qualifying criteria is
available in our document on [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) .

**Jobseeker's Allowance (JA)**

Jobseeker's Allowance weekly rate _________  
(Your age can determine  
your maximum weekly rate  
Find your rate in our  
document on [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-allowance/) )

**Add** [ Child Dependant Increase ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/)  
(Add an increase for each qualified child dependant,  
see 'Step 2' below)

**Add** [ Increase for a Qualified Adult ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-
social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/)  
(You will not get an increase for +________  
a dependent spouse/civil partner/cohabitant, if  
your spouse is getting a payment in their own right, see 'Step 2'  
below)

**Total** (maximum Jobseeker's Allowance)_________

**Less** weekly means from work **_-______**  
( [ Go to extra information below to help you calculate your weekly means from
work ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-jobseekers-allowance-and-
income-from-work/#29fabe) .)

**Less** spouse's/civil partner's/cohabitant's weekly means from work
**_-_______**  
( [ Go to extra information below to help you calculate your spouse, civil
partner or cohabitant's weekly means from work
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-jobseekers-allowance-and-income-from-
work/#f1a7ec) .)

**Total weekly Jobseeker's Allowance** **payment** **€________**

##  Extra information: How to find your weekly means from work

Use Steps 1-5 to calculate your weekly means from work.

###  Step 1: Assessable weekly earnings

Find your assessable weekly earnings.

The following items are always deducted from your gross earnings to get your
assessable earnings:

  * PRSI Contribution 
  * Union dues 
  * Superannuation 
  * PRSA (Personal Retirement Savings Account) 
  * AVCs (Additional Voluntary Contributions) 

**Example**  
---  
Jim is a single man aged 27. He works 3 days (Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday)
and gets €50 per day. His assessable weekly earnings are €150. We will assume
he is not paying any contribution towards superannuation, union dues, PRSA or
AVC. He does not pay [ PRSI
](../../../../social_welfare/irish_social_welfare_system/social_insurance_prsi/social_insurance_in_ireland.html)
because his earnings are less than €352.  Assessable weekly earnings = €150  
  
###  Step 2: Find out if your assessable weekly earnings are over the limit

Before you calculate how much JA you can get, you must find out if your weekly
means are more than the maximum JA payment for your situation. The maximum
Jobseeker’s Allowance payment includes the [ personal payment
](http://www.welfare.ie/EN/Publications/sw19/Pages/sw19_sect6.aspx) and any
increases for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) and [ dependent children
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) . If
your _means_ are halved, an increase for a qualified adult is not included in
the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment for your situation and you will only
get a half-rate increase for each qualified child.

In this step you are not calculating the actual amount of JA you will get, you
are just checking to see if you have any possibility of getting JA.

To do this take your assessable weekly earnings from Step 1 and deduct €20 per
day for each day you have worked up to a maximum of €60. Next get 60% of the
balance. This is assessed as your weekly means.

Assessable weekly earnings - €20 = total x 60% = weekly means from work.

**Your means are halved** if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is:

  * Getting a social welfare payment (except Child Benefit, Disablement Pension, [ guardian's payment ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/) , [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) , Domiciliary Care Allowance and [ half-rate Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/) ) 
  * On a [ Further Education and Training (FET) ](/en/education/further-education-and-training/training-courses/) or VTOS course and getting an allowance in his or her own right. 

If your means are halved because of the above, you will not get an increase
for a qualified adult but you will get a half-rate increase for each qualified
child when finding the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment for your
situation.

**Community Employment:** If you are getting Jobseeker's Allowance and your
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant starts a Community Employment (CE) Scheme
in 2023, the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment will not include an
increase for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) , but it will include a full-rate
increase for each qualified child. Half of your combined means are taken into
account in the means test.

**If your weekly means are less than the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment
for your situation then** **go to Step 3 and start to calculate the actual
amount of JA you will get.**

**Example**  
---  
Jim's assessable weekly earnings are €150 per week. He works 3 days.  €150 -
€60 (3 days) = €90 x 60% = €54  Weekly means from work = €54  In this example,
Jim’s weekly means are below the basic JA payment for his situation. Go to
Step 3.  
  
###  Step 3: Average daily earnings

Now that you know you are entitled to a JA payment, you can start to calculate
the rate of your JA payment.

Calculate your average daily earnings: to do this get your total weekly
assessable earnings from employment and divide by the number of days you
worked that week.

Total weekly earnings ÷ number of days worked = average daily earnings.

**Example**  
---  
Jim works 3 days each week (Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday) and gets €150 per
week.  €150 ÷ 3 = €50  Average daily earnings = €50  
  
###  Step 4: Daily means from work

Calculate your daily means from work.

To do this, you must disregard any income not taken into account. Income not
taken into account is €20 for days worked. Next get 60% of the balance. This
is assessed as your daily means.

Average daily earnings - €20 = total x 60% = daily means from work.

**Example**  
---  
Jim works 3 days (Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday) and gets €50 per day. His
average daily earnings are €50 (see Step 3).  €50 - €20 = €30  Get 60% of
total (€30 in this example) = €18  Daily means from work = €18  
  
###  Step 5: Weekly means from work

Multiply your daily means by the number of days worked (including Sunday). If
you get paid for a public holiday and don't work that day, it will be included
in the number of days worked.

Daily means from work x number of days worked = weekly means from work.

**Your means are halved** if your spouse/civil partner/cohabitant is:

  * Getting a social welfare payment (except Child Benefit, Disablement Pension, guardian's payment, Supplementary Welfare Allowance, Domiciliary Care Allowance and half-rate Carer's Allowance) 
  * On a FET or VTOS course and getting an allowance in his or her own right. 

If your means are halved because of the above, you will not get an increase
for a qualified adult but you will get a half-rate increase for each qualified
child.

**Community Employment:** If you are getting Jobseeker's Allowance and your
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant starts a Community Employment (CE) Scheme
in 2023, the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment will not include an
increase for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) , but it will include a full-rate
increase for each qualified child. Half of your combined means are taken into
account in the means test.

**Example**  
---  
Jim works 3 days and get €50 per day. His average daily earnings are €50. His
daily means from work is €18 (see Step 4).  €18 x 3 days = €54  Weekly means
from work = €54  
  
##  Extra information: How to find your spouse's, civil partner's or
cohabitant's weekly means from work

To calculate your spouse's, civil partner's or cohabitant's weekly means from
work first calculate his/her assessable earnings.

The following items are always deducted from his/her gross earnings to get
assessable earnings:

  * PRSI (Contribution) 
  * Union dues 
  * Superannuation 
  * PRSA (Personal Retirement Savings Account) 
  * AVCs (Additional Voluntary Contributions) 

Deduct €20 per day from your spouse's/civil partner's/cohabitant's assessable
earnings for each day worked up to a maximum of €60 (including Sunday).

Next get 60% of the balance. This is assessed as his/her weekly means.

Assessable weekly earnings - €20 per day (maximum 3 days) = total x 60% =
weekly means from work.

**Your means are halved** if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is:

  * Getting a social welfare payment (except Child Benefit, Disablement Pension, guardian's payment, Supplementary Welfare Allowance, Domiciliary Care Allowance and half-rate Carer's Allowance) 
  * On a FET or VTOS course and getting an allowance in his or her own right. 

If your means are halved because of the above, you will not get an increase
for a qualified adult but you will get a half-rate increase for each qualified
child.

**Community Employment:** If you are getting Jobseeker's Allowance and your
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant starts a Community Employment (CE) Scheme
in 2023, the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance payment will not include an
increase for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) , but it will include a full-rate
increase for each qualified child. Half of your combined means are taken into
account in the means test.

**Example**  
---  
Partner's assessable weekly earnings are €150 per week. Partner works 3 days
(Wednesday, Friday and Sunday).  €150 - €60 = €90 x 60% = €54  Partner's
weekly means from work = €54  
  
and here

_**Page edited:** 20 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-
jobseekers-allowance-and-income-from-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Worksheet%3A%20Jobseeker%27s%20Allowance%20and%20income%20from%20work&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-
jobseekers-allowance-and-income-from-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-
jobseekers-allowance-and-income-from-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Worksheet%3A%20Jobseeker%27s%20Allowance%20and%20income%20from%20work&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-
jobseekers-allowance-and-income-from-work/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Case study: How income from work affects your Jobseeker's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-2-how-income-from-employment-affects-your-jobseeker-s-allowance/)

A case study showing how income from employment affects your Jobseeker's
Allowance.

2519.6257

  * [ _Worksheet: One-Parent Family Payment and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-one-parent-family-payment-and-income-from-work/)

This worksheet shows the effect of income from work on your One-Parent Family
Payment.

2465.076

  * [ _Worksheet: State Pension (Non-Contributory) and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-state-pension-non-contributory-and-income-from-work/)

Use this worksheet to find out how your earnings from employment will affect
your State Pension (Non-Contributory).

2199.3188

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

