**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Disability and illness payments ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/)
> Disability Allowance

#  Disability Allowance

  * What is Disability Allowance? 
  * How to qualify for Disability Allowance 
  * How your income is assessed for Disability Allowance 
  * Rate of Disability Allowance 
  * How to apply for Disability Allowance 
  * Where to apply for Disability Allowance 

##  What is Disability Allowance?

Disability Allowance (DA) is a weekly allowance paid to people with a
disability. You can get DA from 16 years of age. You can get Disability
Allowance even if you are in school.

If you qualify for DA, you may also get [ extra social welfare benefits
](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/) with your payment and
other [ supplementary welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/) .

##  How to qualify for Disability Allowance

To qualify for Disability Allowance, you must:

  * Have an injury, disease, or physical or mental disability that has continued for at least one year, or is expected to continue for at least one year 
  * Be _substantially_ restricted from doing work because of your disability, that would be suitable for a person of your age, experience and qualifications 
  * Be aged between 16 and 66 
  * Pass a [ means test ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) (an assessment of any income you have – see ‘How your income is assessed for DA’ below) 
  * Live in Ireland and meet the [ habitual residence condition ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-residence-condition/) . 

###  **Medical assessment**

Your doctor must complete a report on your medical condition as part of the
application form. This report is reviewed by one of the DSP’s medical
assessors.

The medical report will allow the DSP to determine if you:

  * Have an injury, disease, or physical or mental disability that has continued for at least one year, or is expected to continue for at least one year, and 
  * Are _substantially_ restricted from doing work because of your disability, that would be suitable for a person of your age, experience and qualifications. 

###  **Can I get Disability Allowance in hospital or residential care?**

You can get Disability Allowance if you are in hospital or residential care.

If you are already getting DA and go into hospital or residential care, you
will continue to get your payment, as long as you continue to meet the
qualifying conditions above.

If you were not getting DA before you started living in residential care, you
can apply for DA.

##  How your income is assessed for Disability Allowance

Disability Allowance (DA) is a means-tested payment.

In a means test, the Department of Social Protection (DSP) examines all your
sources of income. To get DA, your income must be below a certain amount.

The main items included in the means test are:

###  **Cash income**

The DSP looks at your cash income (such as payment from work), that you or
your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant may have.

Some [ cash income may not be included in the means test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-
social-welfare-means-test/) .

###  **Capital**

Capital includes your savings, investments, shares, or any property you have
(but not your own home). The first €50,000 of your capital is not taken into
account for the means test.

Find out more about [ capital not included in the means test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-
capital-for-social-welfare-payments/) .

####  **Moving from DA to the State Pension (Non Contributory)**

The means tests for Disability Allowance (DA) and the [ State Pension (Non-
Contributory) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-
and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/#c25dd5) use different rules
to assess capital. But, if you are moving from DA to the State Pension (Non-
Contributory) at 66, you will not get a lower-rate pension due to a less
favourable assessment of capital.

###  **Maintenance**

The DSP looks at maintenance paid to you. However, since 5 June 2024,
maintenance payments for children are not included in means tests for social
welfare payments. Read more in our page, [ How maintenance is assessed as
means ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-
welfare-payments/) .

####  **Halving of means for some couples**

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant has a social welfare payment in
their own right (excluding Child Benefit, Domiciliary Care Allowance, and
Supplementary Welfare Allowance), your combined means may be halved for the
means test. Read more in our page about [ assessing the means of a couple
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-a-
couple/) .

###  Living with your parent

Your parent’s income is not taken into account when you are assessed for
Disability Allowance.

###  Income from the sale of your home

The means test does not take into account up to €190,500 of the money you get
if you sell your home and:

  * Move to different accommodation (you can either buy or rent) 
  * Move in with someone who is caring for you and getting [ a carer's payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/carers/payments-to-carers/)
  * Move to sheltered or special housing in the voluntary, co-operative, statutory or private sectors 
  * Move into a [ registered private nursing home ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-people/) . 

###  Income from work

Some of your income from work is not taken into account. This includes self-
employed work.

You can work and earn up to €165 a week (after paying PRSI, pension
contributions and union dues) without your DA payment being affected.

If you earn more than €165 a week, 50% of your earnings between €165 and €375
will not be taken into account in the DA means test. Any earnings over €375
are assessed in full.

If you start work, you need to tell the Department of Social Protection (DSP)
and provide proof of your earnings, such as:

  * A [ payslip ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/pay-and-employment/pay-slip/)
  * Your [ contract of employment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/contracts-of-employment/contract-of-employment/)
  * A letter from your employer. 

You can read more in our page about [ how disability payments are affected by
work ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-work/) .

####  **If your partner works**

If your spouse, civil partner or [ cohabitant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/cohabiting-
couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/#e6e823) works, it can affect your
Disability Allowance. While some of their income from employment is not taken
into account, the DSP assesses all their income from self-employment.

Your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant's ‘net’ weekly earnings from work as
an employee are assessed as follows:

  1. €20 per day (up to a maximum of €60) from work is deducted from your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant’s average net weekly earnings, and 
  2. Then 60% of the balance is assessed as weekly means. 

The weekly means is then deducted from your rate of Disability Allowance (your
rate of DA is your personal rate plus the maximum [ Increase for a Qualified
Adult ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-
social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) and any [ Increases for
Qualified Children ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) ).

‘Net’ earnings are your total earnings after PRSI, superannuation (pension
contributions) and union fees are deducted.

###  Income from PhD scholarship

PhD scholarship of up to €20,000 per year, for up to 4 years, is not taken
into account when you are assessed for Disability Allowance.

##  Rate of Disability Allowance

**Weekly maximum** **Disability Allowance rate 2024**

Personal rate  |  €232   
---|---  
Increase for an adult dependant  |  €154   
Child who is under 12 years of age  |  €46 (full-rate), €23 (half-rate)   
Child who is 12 years of age or older  |  €54 (full-rate), €27 (half-rate)   
  
If you are married, in a civil partnership, or cohabiting, and you both
qualify for Disability Allowance, you will each get a weekly personal rate of
Disability Allowance. You can both get the maximum rate if you both qualify
for it.

If you qualify for DA and you or your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is
getting another social welfare payment, you will each get the weekly personal
rate of your own payment.

###  Payments for dependants

If you are married, in a civil partnership or cohabiting, you may get an [
Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) in your DA payment. You may also get
an Increase for a Qualified Child (IQC) if you have [ dependent children
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/) .

If you have children living with you and you are parenting alone, you may get
an IQA for a person who is caring for your child, if the person is:

  * Aged 16 or over 
  * Living with you 
  * Being supported by you. 

This person could be one of your other children.

##  How to apply for Disability Allowance

You can get an [ application form for Disability Allowance (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/37058/cb5b7ad51df64140b7ec346446ef31fb.pdf) from your
local:

  * [ Intreo Centre or a Social Welfare Branch Office ](https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Intreo-Centres-and-Local-and-Branch-Offices.aspx)
  * [ Citizens Information Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) . 

If you think you have been wrongly refused DA you can [ appeal this decision
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/) .

##  Where to apply for Disability Allowance

###  Disability Allowance Section

Department of Social Protection  
Social Welfare Services Office  
Government Buildings  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
Ireland

**Tel:** (043) 334 0000 or 0818 927 770

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/df6811-disability-allowance/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/df6811-disability-allowance/)

**Email:** [ DA_InetInfo@welfare.ie ](mailto:DA_InetInfo@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 5 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Disability%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Disability%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Disability payments and work_ ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-work/)

Information on how work or training can affect your disability payment and any
extra benefits you are getting.

1454.6404

  * [ _Disability payments and the Arts and Disability Connect fund_ ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-payments-and-art-council-grants/)

Information on how the Arts and Disability Connect fund can affect your
disability payment and any extra benefits you are getting.

1437.077

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

1278.587

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

