**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Disability and illness payments ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/)
> Medical Care Scheme

#  Medical Care Scheme

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you are injured at work, on an unbroken journey to/from work or you
contract a prescribed occupational disease you may get benefits under the [
Occupational Injuries Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/) . One of these benefits is
Medical Care. The Medical Care Scheme allows you to get a refund of the costs
of medical care and attention that are not paid by the [ Health Service
Executive (HSE) ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) or
covered by the Treatment Benefit Scheme.  

##  Rules

The following expenses may be refunded if they are not fully met by the HSE or
the Department of Social Protection's [ Treatment Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/treatment-benefit-scheme/) :

  * Doctors' visits 
  * Doctors' prescriptions 
  * Certain medical or surgical appliances and the repair and replacement of these (for example, artificial limbs or hearing aids) 
  * Certain dental and optical treatment 
  * Certain treatment prescribed by your doctor excluding treatment available under the Health Acts (for example, physiotherapy, scans (MRI) and consultant consultations) 
  * Certain travelling expenses, usually limited to the cost of public transport. 

The expenses must be  reasonable  and  necessary  . Medical Care is paid by
Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT). Normally, only one payment is made but if the
treatment is ongoing, payment may be made in a few instalments. Payment is
usually made to the person who claims, but may be made to the HSE.

To qualify for a refund of medical costs you must satisfy the following
conditions:

  * Your injury must have been caused by an accident at work or as a result of your work you must have contracted a [ prescribed occupational disease ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/040383-operational-guidelines-occupational-injuries-benefit-disablement-ben/) _and_
  * You should notify the Department of your intention to claim medical care within 6 weeks of the start of medical treatment. This is normally 6 weeks from the date of the accident or the development of the disease and you must be in employment insurable at PRSI class A, B, D, J or M. 

All work accidents or occupational diseases may not result immediately in
illness or disablement. If you are not immediately incapacitated but wish to
safeguard your future right to benefit, you should  tell your employer  about
the accident/disease. You should  apply for a declaration  that your
accident/disease was an occupational one. This should be done  without delay
.

##  How to apply

To apply, fill in a [ Medical Care form C1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/24391/1903912433de49c9beb486097ce41547.pdf) . If you
don't have a C1 form, you can phone the Medical Care Section and ask them to
send you a C1 (see address below). You can get more information on the scheme
in the leaflet [ Medical Care SW34
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/5903e4-operational-guidelines-
occupational-injuries-benefit-medical-care-un/) .

Make sure you quote your [ PPS number ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) on any receipts you send in
with the medical care claim form C1. Note that only original receipts are
accepted, payment will not issue for a claim based on photocopied receipts.

##  Where to apply

###  Occupational Injuries Benefit Section

Department of Social Protection  
√Åras Mhic Dhiarmada  
Store Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 704 3300 or 0818 928 400

**Email:** [ illnessbenefit@welfare.ie ](mailto:illnessbenefit@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 5 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/medical-care-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Medical%20Care%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/medical-care-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/medical-care-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Medical%20Care%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/medical-care-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Tax refund if you are unemployed or out of work sick_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/)

Explanation of how to get a tax refund if you have been working and are now
unemployed or out of work due to illness.

1664.8048

  * [ _Consent to medical and surgical procedures_ ](/en/health/legal-matters-and-health/consent-to-medical-and-surgical-procedures/)

As a general rule, informed consent must be given before medical and surgical
procedures can happen in Ireland. Find out more.

1232.4177

  * [ _Unpaid leave for medical care_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/unpaid-leave-for-medical-care/)

Unpaid leave for medical care gives you 5 days unpaid leave from work to deal
with serious medical care for a child or other relevant person.

1107.6663

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

