**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Extra social welfare benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/) > Telephone Support Allowance

#  Telephone Support Allowance

  * What is the Telephone Support Allowance? 
  * How to qualify for Telephone Support Allowance 
  * Rate of Telephone Support Allowance 
  * Can I apply for Telephone Support Allowance? 

##  What is the Telephone Support Allowance?

The Telephone Support Allowance (TSA) is an extra weekly payment for people on
certain social welfare payments who are also getting both the Living Alone
Increase and the Fuel Allowance.

It can help people living alone with the cost of communications or a home
alert system.

You do not need to apply for Telephone Support Allowance because it is paid
automatically to people who qualify. It is paid with your main weekly social
welfare payment.

##  How to qualify for Telephone Support Allowance

To qualify, you must be getting both the [ Living Alone Increase ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/) and the [ Fuel
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
along with one of the following payments:

  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)
  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension under the [ Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)
  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
  * [ Disablement Pension (Incapacity Supplement) ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disablement-benefit/)
  * [ Deserted Wife's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/)

You can read more about the [ Telephone Support Allowance
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/4d2773-telephone-support-
allowance/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Telephone-Support-
Allowance.aspx) on Gov.ie.

##  Rate of Telephone Support Allowance

**Weekly rate of** **Telephone Support Allowance in 2024**

**Payment** |  **Weekly rate**  
---|---  
Telephone Support Allowance  |  €2.50   
  
The Telephone Support Allowance is an additional sum paid on the same day and
by the same method, as your main weekly payment.

##  Can I apply for Telephone Support Allowance?

You do not need to apply for the Telephone Support Allowance (TSA) because it
is paid automatically to people who qualify. There is no application form.

If you think you qualify for TSA but haven’t received an automatic payment,
you should contact the section in the [ Department of Social Protection
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/4d2773-telephone-support-
allowance/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Telephone-Support-
Allowance.aspx#apply) that pays your main social welfare payment (see the list
of qualifying payments in ‘How to qualify for Telephone Support Allowance’
above).

_**Page edited:** 22 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/telephone-support-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Telephone%20Support%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/telephone-support-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/telephone-support-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Telephone%20Support%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/telephone-support-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Overview of the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-scheme/)

Describes the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme including the basic
payment and supplements under the scheme.

1625.8014

  * [ _Social welfare payments and living on a specified island_ ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-increase/)

If you are getting a certain social welfare payment and living on a specified
island off the coast of Ireland, you can get an increase in your social
welfare payment .

1483.5604

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

1377.0558

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

