**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Families and children ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/) > Working
Family Payment

#  Working Family Payment

  * What is the Working Family Payment? 
  * Rules for getting the Working Family Payment 
  * Changes that can affect your Working Family Payment 
  * Other social welfare payments and the Working Family Payment 
  * Maintenance and the Working Family Payment 
  * Rate of Working Family Payment 
  * How to apply for the Working Family Payment 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is the Working Family Payment?

Working Family Payment (WFP) is a weekly tax-free payment for employees with
children. It supports people who are on low pay. WFP used to be called Family
Income Supplement (FIS).

You must be an employee to get WFP. You cannot get it if you are self-employed
only.

You must have at least one child who normally lives with you or who you
support financially. Your child must be under 18 (or between 18 and 22 if they
are in full-time day education).

To get WFP, your average weekly family income must be under a certain amount
for your family size. The WFP payment you get is 60% of the difference between
your average weekly family income and the WFP income limit for your family
size. For more information, see ‘Rate of Working Family Payment’ below.

WFP is not taken into account in the means test for a [ medical card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) .

##  Rules for getting the Working Family Payment

You can get a weekly tax-free WFP payment if you are an employee and:

  * Work 38 or more hours per fortnight (in any combination of hours). You can combine your weekly hours with your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant's hours to meet this condition. You **cannot** use time spent in self-employment (or on Community Employment, Tús, JobBridge or the Rural Social Scheme) to meet this condition. 
  * Your job is likely to last at least 3 months 
  * You have at least one child who normally lives with you 
  * You earn less than the WFP income limit set for your family size 

You must pay tax and PRSI in Ireland. Under EU regulations, you may be able to
claim WFP if your children are living abroad and are dependent on you.

WFP is paid for one year (52 weeks), as long as you meet the conditions. It
does not change if your earnings from work go up or down during that year.
After 52 weeks, you can apply again for WFP. Some changes to your situation
can affect your WFP – see below.

####  Apprenticeships and WFP

You can get the Working Family Payment if you are an [ apprentice
](/en/education/further-education-and-training/apprenticeships/) , as long as
you meet the rules for getting WFP - see above.

An apprenticeship usually alternates between off-the-job training in an
education centre and on-the-job training at your employer's workplace. For the
purposes of WFP, apprentices are considered to be in employment while in both
on-the-job and off-the-job training.

##  Changes that can affect your Working Family Payment

###  Changes to your personal situation

Your claim can be reassessed and you may get an increase in your weekly rate
of WFP in the following 2 situations:

  * If you start to care for an additional child 
  * If you were getting a [ One-Parent Family Payment (OFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) and your payment has stopped because your youngest child has reached the OFP age limit 

###  Changes at work

**If your pay from work is reduced** , your WFP will stay the same. It will
not increase. However, when your WFP ends you can apply again with details of
your new lower income.

**If the number of hours you work each week falls** to under 38 hours a
fortnight, you are no longer entitled to WFP. You should tell the WFP section
of the Department of Social Protection (DSP) if this happens. See ‘Where to
apply’ below.

**If you move to a new job and continue to meet the rules for WFP (see
above)** , you can stay on your current WFP claim. You don’t have to tell the
WFP section of the DSP that you have moved to a new job. If you are getting
paid less in your new job, your WFP claim will not be reviewed to reflect the
decrease.

However, if you want your WFP to reflect your new income, you should:

  1. Contact the WFP Section to tell them that your circumstances have changed and that your current claim should be closed **and**
  2. Re-apply for WFP. 

**If you lose your job** , you are no longer entitled to WFP. You must tell
the WFP section of the DSP.

##  Other social welfare payments and the Working Family Payment

####  Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance

If you are getting WFP, you may also be entitled to the [ Back to School
Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/) .

####  Back to Work Family Dividend

The [ Back to Work Family Dividend (BTWFD) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-work-family-dividend/) and WFP can be paid together. The
BTWFD is not taken into account in the income test for WFP.

####  **Parenting alone**

If you are parenting alone, you may be entitled to WFP in addition to your [
One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) , [ Deserted Wife's Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/) or [ Widow’s,
Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/) .

####  **Maternity, adoptive, paternity or parent’s leave**

When you are on [ maternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/maternity-leave/) , [ adoptive leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-
leave/) , [ paternity leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/paternity-leave/) or [ parent's leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/parents-
leave/) , you are entitled to be treated in the same way as when you are at
work. This means that you can claim WFP if you meet the conditions of the WFP
and already have a child. A pregnant woman who has no other children does not
qualify for WFP until the birth of the baby.

You cannot continue to claim WFP if you:

  * Take additional unpaid maternity leave or adoptive leave 
  * Lose your job after returning to work 
  * Give up your job 

####  **Adoptive, Maternity, Paternity and Parent’s Benefit**

You can continue to get your WFP with your Adoptive Benefit, Maternity
Benefit, Paternity Benefit and Parent's Benefit, as long as you meet the
qualifying criteria for both.

####  Illness Benefit and Injury Benefit

If you are getting WFP and become ill, you can continue to get WFP with [
Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/)
for up to 36 days (6 weeks). This applies to each separate period of illness.

If you are getting WFP and cannot work because of an occupational illness or
disease, you can continue to get WFP with your [ Injury Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/) for up to 36 days (6 weeks).

####  **Payments that cannot be claimed with WFP**

You cannot get WFP, if you are on one of these schemes or social welfare
payments:

  * [ Community Employment Scheme ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/community-employment-scheme/) , [ Rural Social Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/rural-social-scheme/) , or [ the Tús scheme ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/tus/) . 
  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) , [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) , [ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/) or [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/)
  * [ Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-scheme/) . 

Your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant can claim WFP while you are getting
one of these payments. However, an Increase for a Qualified Adult (IQA) will
no longer be paid and your social welfare payment will be assessed as income
for their WFP. Any Increase for a Qualified Child (IQC) will be affected.

Similarly, if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is getting one of these
payments, you can qualify for WFP, but they will no longer be paid an IQA for
you.

##  Maintenance and the Working Family Payment

If you are a separated parent, you can apply for WFP if you meet the
qualifying conditions and:

  * You are living with the children **or**
  * You are _wholly_ _maintaining_ your ex-spouse, ex-civil partner, or ex-cohabitant with whom the children are living 

_Wholly_ _maintaining_ means that the maintenance paid by you, the WFP
applicant, must be the main income of your ex-spouse, ex-civil partner or ex-
cohabitant. Your ex-spouse or ex-partner cannot have more than €100 a week
income in their own right, and they cannot be married, in a civil partnership
or cohabiting.

WFP is awarded to you for 52 weeks. This means that an ex-partner who is
included in your WFP claim cannot get WFP in their own right, or be included
in another person’s WFP claim, during that 52-week period.

**Paying maintenance**

If you are a separated parent and paying maintenance, you may qualify for WFP.
To qualify, you must be wholly maintaining the parent who the children are
living with. Because only one payment can be made for a family, the parent you
are paying maintenance to must not be getting WFP. You must provide written
evidence from this person to show that they are getting maintenance from you.

If you are paying maintenance for a second family because of a court order or
a legally binding agreement, the amount of that maintenance payment will not
be deducted from the income to be assessed for WFP.

**Getting maintenance**

Maintenance for you is assessed in the means test for WFP (maintenance
payments for a child is not assessed). If you are getting maintenance from
more than one person, all the payments are added together and the total is
assessed as your means.

Some of the maintenance payment that you spend on housing will not be counted
as income for the WFP means test. Your housing costs (your rent or mortgage
repayment) up to a maximum of €95.23 per week can be offset against
maintenance payments. Half the balance is then assessed as means. You must
provide proof of rent or mortgage payments.

You can only use ( _offset_ ) your housing costs in this way for maintenance
payments if you have not already used them in a means test for another social
welfare payment.

Non-cash benefits are not assessed as means. For example, if your rent or
mortgage payments are made by an ex-spouse or ex-partner under a maintenance
agreement, it is not assessed.

You can get more information on [ how maintenance is assessed as means
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/) .

##  Rate of Working Family Payment

The DSP will assess your household income in a means test. It compares your
total income to the WFP income limit for your family size.

If you earn less than the WFP income limit, you may get WFP.

Your WFP will be 60% of the difference between the WFP income limit for your
family size and your assessable income. The combined income of a couple (who
are married, in a civil partnership or cohabiting) is taken into account when
calculating assessable income.

###  **Assessable income**

Income that is taken into account for the Working Family Payment is called
'assessable income'.

It can include:

  * Your assessable earnings and your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant's assessable earnings. (Assessable earnings are gross pay minus tax, employee PRSI, Universal Social Charge and superannuation (including the Public Service Pension Levy and contributions to Personal Retirement Savings Accounts.) Income from working as a home help is assessed. 
  * Extra income you or your spouse, civil partner, or cohabitant have from employment (such as pay for overtime, bonuses, allowances or commission) 
  * Any income you or your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant have from self-employment 
  * Income from occupational pensions 
  * Income you or your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant may have including social welfare payments 
  * All family income from carer's payments ( [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) or [ Carer's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) ) 
  * Rental income from the letting of property or land (the capital value is not assessed). The gross rental income is assessed and you cannot deduct mortgage payments or other expenses. Certain income from rent is not included in the means test – see ‘Income from rent’ below. 

Generally, all financial compensation is taken into account. However, certain
types of compensation are not assessed as income. You can find a [ list of
compensation payments not assessed ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-
social-welfare-means-test/) as income.

The WFP income test does not assess capital. This includes property you own,
bank accounts and cars.

####  Payments not included

The following payments **do not** count as family income:

  * [ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/)
  * [ Guardian's payments ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/)
  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/)
  * [ Domiciliary Care Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/)
  * [ Foster Care Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/fostering/#60a83b)
  * [ Rent Allowance for tenants affected by the de-control of rents ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Rent-Allowance-for-tenants-affected-by-de-control-of-rents--.aspx)
  * [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/)
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
  * Maintenance payments for a child 
  * Income from a charitable organisation 
  * Income from providing accommodation to students studying Irish in Gaeltacht areas under a scheme administered by the Minister for Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sports and Media 
  * Payments under the 1916 Bursary Fund from the Department of Education 
  * Uversity payments made under the [ Higher Education Scholarships for Adult Learners ](https://www.uversity.org/) of up to a maximum of €7,000 per year 
  * Scholarship payments under UCD’s Cothrom na Féine Scholarship Programme of up to €7,000 per year 
  * SUSI maintenance grant 
  * Payments under the Department of Education's school transport scheme for children with special educational needs 
  * Any income your children may have 
  * Payments made under [ an ex gratia scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/8fe41a-the-magdalen-restorative-justice-ex-gratia-scheme/) to people who were admitted to and worked in the Magdalen Laundries 
  * Payments made under the [ Mother and Baby Institutions Payment Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/mother-and-baby-institutions-payment-scheme/)
  * Payments made to people who experienced sexual abuse as a pupil in a recognised day school, before [ the Guidelines for Procedures for Dealing with Allegations or Suspicions of Child Abuse ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ef0a6-guidelines-for-procedures-for-dealing-with-allegations-or-suspicions-of-child-abuse/) , and who took legal action against the State as a result 

###  Income from rent

Rental income from the letting of property or land is assessed and you cannot
deduct mortgage payments or other expenses.

However, you can get up to [ €14,000 per year for renting out a room in your
own home ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/#b0e931) without it affecting your Working
Family Payment.

The maximum income disregard is €269.23 a week (€14,000 per year).

###  **Calculating your income for WFP**

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) calculates your assessable earnings
over a certain period of time.

Because WFP is paid over 52 weeks, the DSP tries to calculate your average
earnings over a similar period of time. Normally they will use your earnings
up to the date of your application. If you are newly in employment, your
average weekly income is calculated from when you started work with that
employer.

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is self-employed, their income
over the 12-month period before you apply is used to work out their average
weekly income.

Again, to qualify, your average weekly family income must be below the WFP
income limit for your family size.

**Working Family Payment income limits from 4 January 2024**

**If you have:** |  **And your weekly family income is less than:**  
---|---  
One child  |  €645   
Two children  |  €746   
Three children  |  €847   
Four children  |  €938   
Five children  |  €1,064   
Six children  |  €1,180   
Seven children  |  €1,316   
Eight or more children  |  €1,412   
  
If you qualify for WFP, you get a minimum of €20 each week. You can use the
DSP’s [ benefit of work estimator ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/4c93cf-
benefit-of-work-estimator/) to work out the total amount you would get working
(including any Working Family Payment). It also compares this amount to what
you are getting in jobseeker payments (including Rent Supplement).

If you are getting WFP, you may also be entitled to the [ Back to School
Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/) .

##  How to apply for the Working Family Payment

To apply, fill in an [ application form for Working Family Payment (pdf).
](https://assets.gov.ie/10345/5a43712052a94324bd407443ec52df49.pdf) You can
get a copy of this form in your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch
Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

You can get help filling it in at an Intreo Centre, Social Welfare Branch
Office or [ Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

To make sure that your application for WFP is processed as quickly as
possible, you should send your most recent payslips with your application
form.

###  Apply Online

You can apply for the Working Family Payment online at [ MyWelfare.ie
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/parents-children-family/working-
family-payment/) if you have a [ MyGovID verified account ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/) .

You will need to provide your bank details and information about your (and
your partner’s) income and most recent payslips.

###  Appeals

If you think you have been wrongly refused WFP, [ you can appeal this decision
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/) .

##  Where to apply

Send your completed Working Family Payment application form to:

###  Working Family Payment (WFP) Section

Department of Social Protection

Working Family Payment Section  
St. Oliver Plunkett Road  
Letterkenny  
Co. Donegal  
F92 T449

**Opening Hours:** Phone line: 10:00am - 4.00pm, Monday to Friday.

**Tel:** 074 916 4575

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/08bb21-working-family-payment/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/08bb21-working-family-payment/)

**Email:** [ wfpnewclaims@welfare.ie ](mailto:wfpnewclaims@welfare.ie)

You can also use the following email addresses:

  * New applications: [ WFPNewClaims@welfare.ie ](mailto:WFPNewClaims@welfare.ie)
  * Renewal applications: [ WFPRenewals@welfare.ie ](mailto:WFPRenewals@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 5 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/working-family-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Working%20Family%20Payment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/working-family-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/working-family-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Working%20Family%20Payment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/working-family-
payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet: How to calculate your Working Family Payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-how-to-calculate-your-family-income-supplement/)

This worksheet is to help you to work out the amount of Working Family Payment
you may get.

2597.009

  * [ _Case study 2: Working Family Payment (WFP)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-2-working-family-payment/)

This case study examines how a family on low income is assessed for Working
Family Payment.

2238.5525

  * [ _Case study 1: Working Family Payment (WFP)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-1-working-family-payment/)

This case study examines how a lone parent is assessed for Working Family
Payment.

2238.4004

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

