**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Supplementary Welfare Schemes ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/) > Overview of the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme

#  Overview of the Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme

  * Overview 

##  Overview

The Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme consists of a basic payment, called
Supplementary Welfare Allowance, and other financial supplements for certain
expenses you may not be able to meet, including emergency situations. It is
administered by the [ Community Welfare Officer (CWO) ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/community-welfare-services-and-
payments/) in your [ local Community Welfare Service
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/cb07d7-supplementary-welfare-allowance-swa-
list-of-offices-administering-swa/) .

[ Basic Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) (SWA) is a weekly payment for
people that have low income or no income. For example, SWA can be paid to you
while the Department Employment Affairs and of Social Protection (DSP) is
processing your claim for another payment. If you are in hospital for a
temporary stay and do not qualify for any other payment, you may be paid a
small amount for your daily personal needs (for example, newspapers and
toiletries). This payment (known as Hospital Comforts) is paid as a basic SWA
payment and is means tested).

[ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) is a payment to help with the cost of rent for people living in
privately rented accommodation.

[ Mortgage Interest Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/mortgage-interest-supplement/) was a payment to help with the cost of
mortgage interest repayments. The Mortgage Interest Supplement scheme closed
to new entrants from 1 January 2014, and no new applications were accepted
from this date. The scheme was wound down for people who were getting Mortgage
Interest Supplement before 1 January 2014 over a 4-year period and closed on
31 December 2017. However, claimants who were getting MIS payments that were
due to end on that date continue to get payments under the Supplementary
Welfare Scheme from 1 January 2018.

The amount you get is equal to the MIS payment that you were getting before 31
December 2017. This payment is made automatically and there is no need to re-
apply to the DSP.

[ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/)
is a payment to help with the cost of uniforms and footwear for children at
school.

[ Diet Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/diet-and-
heating-supplements/) is a payment to help with the cost of a special diet
prescribed by your doctor or hospital consultant (it is no longer paid to new
applicants).

[ Heating Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/diet-
and-heating-supplements/) is a payment to help people who have extra heating
needs with the cost of heating their home. For example, people that are ill or
have a disability.

[ Additional Needs Payment ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/additional-needs-payment/) is a payment to help with an expense that
you cannot pay from your weekly income. For example, it can help with funeral
costs, housing costs and fuel bills. You must have a low income.

###  Appealing a decision

If you are unhappy with the decision of a Community Welfare Officer on your
application, you can appeal the decision to the [ independent Social Welfare
Appeals Office ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
welfare-appeals/) . The Social Welfare Appeals Office deals with appeals
relating to basic SWA and some SWA supplements, but does not decide on appeals
relating to Additional Needs Payment or Heating Supplements. However, you can
ask for an internal review to re-examine decisions on these payments. You
should try to submit as much additional information as possible to help your
case.

_**Page edited:** 8 June 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Overview%20of%20the%20Supplementary%20Welfare%20Allowance%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Overview%20of%20the%20Supplementary%20Welfare%20Allowance%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allowance-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Supplementary Welfare Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/)

Supplementary Welfare Allowance is a payment to people that have no income.
Outlines the conditions for entitlement to basic Supplementary Welfare
Allowance including the means test.

2075.357

  * [ _How parents' income can affect Supplementary Welfare Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-supplementary-welfare-allowance/)

Your parents' income may be taken into account when you apply for
Supplementary Welfare Allowance. Find out how the ‘benefit and privilege’ you
get from living with your parents is assessed.

2003.1548

  * [ _Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/death-benefits-under-oib/)

Information about Death Benefits under the Occupational Injuries Scheme.

1576.7532

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

