**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/) > Widowed
or Surviving Civil Partner Grant

#  Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant is a once-off payment to widows,
widowers or surviving civil partners with dependent children.  

##  Rules

This grant is available to widows, widowers or surviving civil partners who
have one or more dependent children living with them at the date of death, or
a widow or surviving civil partner whose child is born within 10 months of the
date of death of her spouse or civil partner.

For the purpose of the Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant, a qualified
child is a child up to age 18, who is normally resident in the State and who
is living with you. A child aged between 18 and 22 who is normally resident in
the State continues to be a qualified child if they are in full-time education
at a recognised school or college.

You must also qualify for one of the following payments:

  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s Contributory Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * Death Benefit under the [ Occupational Injuries Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)
  * A Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Contributory) Pension under EU regulations or under a bilateral social security agreement between Ireland and another country 
  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)

##  Rates

This grant is a once-off payment of €8,000.

The Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant can be paid by cheque or directly
to your account in a financial institution.

##  How to apply

[ Download Form WPG 1 here (pdf).
](https://assets.gov.ie/43586/3b7e82258eaa4f198294a8ca00b82157.pdf)

##  Where to apply

###  Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension Section

Department of Social Protection

Pensions Services Offices  
College Road  
Sligo  
Ireland

**Tel:** (071) 915 7100 or 0818 200 400

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-widowers-contributory-
pension/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-widowers-contributory-
pension/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/269fa9-widows-widowers-or-
surviving-civil-partners-non-contributory-pension/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/269fa9-widows-widowers-or-surviving-civil-
partners-non-contributory-pension/)

If you wish to talk to someone about your pension entitlements, you can visit
your local Citizens Information Centre, local social welfare office or Intreo
centre.  
  

_**Page edited:** 4 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-parents-bereavement-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Widowed%20or%20Surviving%20Civil%20Partner%20Grant&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-parents-bereavement-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-parents-bereavement-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Widowed%20or%20Surviving%20Civil%20Partner%20Grant&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-parents-bereavement-
grant/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Non-Contributory) Pension_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)

The Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s Non-Contributory Pension
is payable to widowed people or surviving civil partners without dependent
children who do not qualify for a contributory pension and who pass a means
test.

1708.6008

  * [ _Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)

A Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's contributory pension and
related social welfare benefits may be payable if either the deceased person
or their spouse/civil partner has enough PRSI contributions.

1618.0123

  * [ _Bringing your non-EEA spouse or civil partner home to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-non-eea-spouse/)

A step-by-step guide to the immigration process for your non-EEA spouse or
civil partner. Outlines the process for bringing your spouse or civil partner
who is not from the EEA, the EU, the UK or Switzerland, home to Ireland to
live and work.

1247.2136

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

