**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/) > How social welfare
payments are paid

#  How social welfare payments are paid

  * How is my social welfare paid? 
  * Time limit for collecting a social welfare payment at the Post Office 

##  How is my social welfare paid?

If you live in Ireland and are getting a social welfare payment, you may be
able to choose the method by which you are paid.

You should check with the Department of Social Protection (DSP) the payment
methods that are available to you. The final decision on how you are paid
rests with the Department.

There are different methods of payment:

  * **Financial institution:** your social welfare payment may be paid by Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) directly into your personal account at a bank, building society or at certain credit unions. You can use [ form DIR PMT1 ](https://assets.gov.ie/43104/d9435859f91b4d53b02231380994ce7e.pdf) to apply for an EFT payment. The DSP will decide if you can be paid by EFT. 
  * **Post Office:** your social welfare payment may be paid to your local post office where it must be collected in person. You can collect your payment in cash from your Post Office. You will need a [ Public Services Card (PSC) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/) or Social Services Card (SSC) for identification (ID) to collect your payment. If using an SSC, you will also require photo ID. 
  * **By cheque:** payment by cheque can be made in exceptional circumstances or to pay arrears. It can be cashed in your local post office or lodged to your bank account. 

Social welfare payments are no longer paid using a book of _payable orders_
that you can cash at your local post office.

##  Time limit for collecting a social welfare payment at the Post Office

The following payments should be collected on the day that they are paid:

  * Farm Assist - paid on Tuesday 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance - paid on Tuesday 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit - paid on Wednesday 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) - paid on Wednesday 
  * Jobseeker's Transitional payment - paid on Thursday 
  * One-Parent Family Payment - paid on Thursday 
  * Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme - paid on Friday 

If you can't collect your payment on the day that it is paid, you should
contact your local Intreo Centre.

**Payments you can collect after the date they are paid:**

  * Child Benefit will be available in the Post Office for 108 days 
  * The State pension will be available in the Post Office for 90 days 

If you are unable to collect your payment from the Post Office, you can
nominate a temporary Agent to collect your payment. You can get a [ form for
appointing a temporary Agent
](https://www.anpost.com/AnPost/media/PDFs/Appointment-of-Temporary-Agent.pdf)
at your local post office. Depending on your circumstances, you can also [
nominate a permanent agent
](https://assets.gov.ie/44370/a606cd22a6ca4d9d927222e349dc4a11.pdf) to collect
your payment or apply to transfer your payment to your financial institution
using [ form DIR PMT1
](https://assets.gov.ie/43104/d9435859f91b4d53b02231380994ce7e.pdf) .

_**Page edited:** 4 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-
social-welfare-payments-are-paid/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=How%20social%20welfare%20payments%20are%20paid&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-
social-welfare-payments-are-paid/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-
social-welfare-payments-are-paid/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=How%20social%20welfare%20payments%20are%20paid&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-
social-welfare-payments-are-paid/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Examples of how social welfare payments are taxed_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-taxed/)

See examples of how social welfare payments are taxed, such as Maternity
Benefit, Jobseekerâ€™s Benefit, and Illness Benefit.

3029.6318

  * [ _Taxation of social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

Find out which social welfare payments are taxable, and which payments are
not.

1900.3864

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

1900.3864

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

