**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) >
Voluntary work and social welfare payments

#  Voluntary work and social welfare payments

  * Introduction 
  * Disability payments and volunteering 
  * Carer’s payments and volunteering 
  * Jobseeker’s payments and volunteering 
  * Other social welfare payments 

##  Introduction

Voluntary work is a good way to keep active, learn new skills and get involved
in your local community. You can do some unpaid work as a volunteer and keep
your social welfare payment. However, you must continue to meet all the
conditions attached to your payment.

Your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office or the section paying your
social welfare payment will usually decide whether you can keep your social
welfare payment and work as a volunteer.

##  Disability payments and volunteering

If you are getting Disability Allowance, Illness Benefit or Invalidity Pension
you must get permission to work as a volunteer. You must apply to the section
that pays your social welfare payment **before** starting any voluntary work.

If you are getting Illness Benefit, you apply to the [ Partial Capacity
Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/partial-capacity-benefit/)
section for permission to do voluntary work.

If you are getting [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/invalidity-pension/) , you must apply directly to the Invalidity
Pension section for permission. You can find out more about [ how the DSP
decides on voluntary work
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/79a358-operational-guidelines-invalidity-
pension/#disqualification) .

##  Carer’s payments and volunteering

To qualify for a carer’s payment you must be providing full-time care. If you
are getting Carer’s Allowance or Carer’s Benefit, you can do a maximum of 18.5
hours per week of voluntary work. Before you start working as a volunteer, you
must get permission from the [ Carer’s Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) or [ Carer’s Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-benefit/) section in the Department of Social
Protection.

##  Jobseeker’s payments and volunteering

To get [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-allowance/) or [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) you must be available and
looking for work. If you want to do voluntary work, you must first get
permission from a Deciding Officer at your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office. You must continue to satisfy the [ conditions of your
jobseeker’s payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-
a-jobseekers-payment/) .

The Deciding Officer considers a number of factors when deciding if the work
involved is voluntary.

These include:

  * The aims and standing of the voluntary organisation (they can be national or local voluntary groups) 
  * The type of work involved 
  * The weekly number of hours worked. 

Examples of unpaid voluntary work a jobseeker can do include assisting youth
clubs, care groups, sports groups, and local residents associations.

If you want to do voluntary work and continue to get Jobseeker’s Allowance or
Jobseeker’s Benefit, you must apply under the voluntary work option before you
start any voluntary work. To apply, fill in [ application form (VW1)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/form/8cae6-voluntary-work-jobseeker-application-form-
vw1/) , which is available from your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch
Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

##  Other social welfare payments

If you are getting one of the payments listed below, there are no restrictions
on the number of hours or type of unpaid work you may do. In addition, you
don’t need prior permission to do voluntary work.

  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)
  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)
  * State Pension (Transition) 
  * [ Widow’s/Widower’s/Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Widow’s/Widower’s/Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * Guardian's Payment (Contributory) 
  * Guardian's Payment (Non-Contributory) 
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment (OFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/)
  * [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)
  * [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/)
  * [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/)
  * [ Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/)

_**Page edited:** 18 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Voluntary%20work%20and%20social%20welfare%20payments&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Voluntary%20work%20and%20social%20welfare%20payments&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

2557.8157

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2395.4775

  * [ _Capital and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/)

Capital for Irish social welfare purposes includes property, savings and
investments. Find out how to assess income from capital for social welfare
payments.

2345.3257

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

