**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Means test for social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/) > Means test for
Jobseeker's Allowance

#  Means test for Jobseeker's Allowance

  * Introduction 
  * Cash income 
  * Property you personally use 
  * Capital and property not personally used 
  * Living with your parents 
  * Total means 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

To qualify for [ Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) you must satisfy a mean
test. In a means test, the Department of Social Protection (DSP) examines all
your sources of income to test if they are under a certain amount. If they are
under that amount, you will get Jobseeker’s Allowance. The amount of
Jobseeker’s Allowance you get depends on your income level.

In the means test for Jobseeker’s Allowance, your **household income** is
assessed. If you are married, in a civil partnership or cohabiting, the DSP
also assesses your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant’s income. Sometimes a
certain amount of income, or income from certain sources, are not taken into
account. This is called an ‘income disregard’.

The means test examines the following types of income:

  * Cash income (including income from work) 
  * Property that you personally use 
  * Capital (savings and investments) and property that you don’t personally use 
  * Benefit and privilege from living with your parents 

##  Cash income

The means test assesses all cash income that you expect to get in the next 12
months. If it is not possible to estimate your income over the next 12 months,
it is usually based on the income you received in the previous year.

Cash income that is assessed includes:

  * [ Income from self-employment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-unemployment/)
  * [ Income from employment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ Farm income ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/60bc41-operational-guidelines-for-social-welfare-investigators-on-the-asses/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Farm-Means---Assessment-of-Income-from-Farming.aspx)
  * Income from a social security pension from another country 
  * [ Income from maintenance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-payments/) , for example, if you are separated. 

Most social welfare payments are not taken into account. The maintenance grant
provided under the [ Student Grant Scheme ](/en/education/third-level-
education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/)
is also not taken into account as means.

Find out more about [ cash income not included in the means test ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-test/) .

##  Property you personally use

The house you live in is not included in the means test, unless you are
getting an income from it.

If you are getting Jobseeker’s Allowance, you can get up to €269.23 a week
(€14,000 per year) for [ renting out a room in your own home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/renting-out-a-room-in-your-home/#403a9f) without it affecting your
payment. This does not apply if you are renting to an employee or an immediate
family member. If you get any rental income over €14,000 per year, it will be
assessed.

You can read more about [ how property you live in is assessed in the means
test for social welfare payments
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/#deeee4) .

##  Capital and property not personally used

Capital includes property, savings and investments. It does **not** include
the home you live in.

If you own property, or have investments, or any other form of capital, the
value is assessed using a standard formula (see below), whether or not you are
getting an income from the property or investment.

If you rent out your property, your rental income will not be assessed. Any
outstanding mortgage registered against the property is deducted from the
market value to find the capital value.

The property and investments that may be assessed include:

  * Savings in a bank account (or anywhere else) 
  * A pension lump sum payment 
  * A house that you rent out 
  * Stocks and shares 

If you or your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant saves a portion of your
social welfare payment each week, these savings (as well as savings from most
other sources) will be taken into account for the means test.

The formula for assessing the value of capital including property (but not
your own home), savings and investments is as follows:

**Capital** |  **Weekly means assessed**  
---|---  
First €20,000  |  Nil   
Next €10,000  |  €1 per €1,000   
Next €10,000  |  €2 per €1,000   
Over €40,000  |  €4 per €1,000   
  
If you have a **joint account** with your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant,
legally the total amount in the account is owned by each of you. So, it can be
assessed in full against each of you. However, if you are both getting means-
tested payments, your joint account will be assessed on a shared basis or
against only one of you.

**For example**  
---  
If you have €55,000 savings:  The first €20,000 is assessed as nil, €20,000 to
€30,000 is assessed as €10, €30,000 to €40,000 is assessed as €20, €40,000 and
€55,000 is assessed as €60.  €10 + €20 + €60 = €90  Savings of €55,000 gives a
means of €90 per week.  
  
##  Living with your parents

If you are under **25** and live with a parent or a step-parent in the family
home, some of your parents' income will also be taken into account in the
assessment for Jobseeker's Allowance.

This is called an assessment of the _benefit and privilege_ you get from
living with your parents. Find more information on [ how benefit and privilege
is assessed in the means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-
jobseekers-allowance/) .

##  Total means

To find your total means, the DSP adds your means from the sources above
together (for example, cash income, employment, capital, benefit and
privilege).

They will deduct (take away) your total household means from the maximum
payment for your situation (see below) to find how much Jobseeker’s Allowance
you can get.

####  **Maximum payment for your situation**

The maximum payment you can get is [ the maximum personal rate of Jobseeker's
Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/#28a767) , including
any increases for adult and child dependants. However, if you are married, in
a civil partnership or cohabiting and your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant
is getting their own social welfare payment, your joint means are halved.

If they are getting their own social welfare payment, your maximum payment
will **not** include an increase for an adult dependant and will only include
half-rate increases for your child dependants - see 'Couples' below.

####  Age and maximum payment

If you are under 25, the maximum payment you can get depends on your age and
some other criteria. Read more about [ JA rate for people under 25
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) .

###  Couples

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is getting their own social
welfare payment in their own right (except Child Benefit, Disablement Pension,
[ guardian's payments ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-
payments/) , [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) , [
Domiciliary Care Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-
allowance/) or [ half-rate Carer's Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/) ), or if they are on a [ Further
Education and Training (FET)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-
training/training-courses/) or VTOS course and getting a payment, you
**cannot** get an Increase for a Qualified Adult for them.

This means that the maximum you can be paid is the maximum Jobseeker’s
Allowance payment for a single person, plus a half-rate allowance for each
qualified child. Your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant will also get a
half-rate payment for each qualified child with their payment.

Only half (50%) of your combined means are taken into account in the means
test for your Jobseeker’s Allowance – this means **your combined means are
halved** . The other half will be taken into account in the means test for
your partner's payment, if your partner is getting a means-tested payment.

####  Community Employment

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant **started a CE scheme in 2023** ,
your joint means are halved. The maximum payment for your situation will
**not** include an increase for an adult dependant. It will include full rate
increases for your child dependants.

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant started their CE scheme **before 1
January 2023** , your maximum payment will include an increase for an adult
dependant and any child dependents. Joint means are not halved and CE income
is [ assessed as part-time work ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/)
.

**Limitation**

If you are claiming Jobseeker's Allowance and your spouse, civil partner or
cohabitant is getting one of the social welfare payments listed below, the
total amount paid to you as a couple cannot be more than the maximum amount
that would be paid to one person (including adult and child dependants) on one
social welfare payment.

  * Illness Benefit 
  * Disablement Pension (when paid with Illness Benefit or Incapacity Supplement) 
  * Injury Benefit 
  * Invalidity Pension 
  * State Pension (Non-Contributory) 
  * State Pension (Contributory) 
  * State Pension (Transition) 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Farm Assist (FA) 

If you are both claiming Jobseeker’s Allowance, the rate paid to each person
is half of the family rate. If either of you is under 25, each person is paid
half of the family rate that would apply to them individually.

**Example of limitation (2024)**  
---  
Paul is 36 and qualifies for Jobseeker’s Allowance. His partner Anna is
getting Invalidity Pension.  Anna and Paul have chosen Anna's Invalidity
Pension as the primary payment rather than Paul's Jobseeker's Allowance
because Invalidity Pension is paid at a higher weekly rate.  Anna on
Invalidity Pension (IP) €237.50  
Qualified adult rate for IP €169.70  Maximum payable to Anna and Paul €407.20
In this case Paul's JA payment is reduced to €169.70 and Anna is paid the full
amount of IP.  **Paul will get Jobseeker’s Allowance of €169.70**  
  
##  More information

You can also find more information in the Department of Social Protection’s
Operational Guidelines about:

  * [ Cash income as means ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/11f23e-means-assessment-guidelines/#cash-income)
  * [ Property as means ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/11f23e-means-assessment-guidelines/#property)
  * [ Means of a couple ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/11f23e-means-assessment-guidelines/#assessing-the-means-of-a-couple)
  * [ Other pensions as means ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/11f23e-means-assessment-guidelines/#assessing-other-pensions)
  * [ Farm means ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/11f23e-means-assessment-guidelines/)

_**Page edited:** 16 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Means%20test%20for%20Jobseeker%27s%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Means%20test%20for%20Jobseeker%27s%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Cash income not included in the means test_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-test/)

This page lists the income from cash not included in the means test for social
welfare payments.

3460.7

  * [ _Over 70s means test for medical cards_ ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card-means-test-over-70s/)

How your income is assessed for the medical card income limits if you are over
70 years of age.

2161.33

  * [ _Means test_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/)

To get a social assistance payment, you must pass a means test. A means test
examines all your sources of income. However, some income is not taken into
account.

2160.404

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

