**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Families and children ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/) > Deserted
Wife's Allowance

#  Deserted Wife's Allowance

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Deserted Wife's Allowance is a means-tested payment made to women under 66
years without dependent children, who were deserted by their husband and who
do not qualify for [ Deserted Wife's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-
and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/) . Deserted Wife's Allowance has been
closed for new applications since 2 January 1997 when the [ One Parent Family
Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
was introduced.

Some women continue to receive Deserted Wife's Allowance because they
qualified for the payment before 2 January 1997 and have continued to meet the
qualifying criteria.

##  Rules

Deserted Wife's Allowance is a payment made to a woman deserted by her husband
and who did not qualify for Deserted Wife's Benefit (because there were
insufficient PRSI contributions recorded on either her own or her husband’s
insurance record before the date of desertion). Deserted Wife's Allowance is
paid until your 66th birthday. You can then apply for a [ State Pension (Non
Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-
contributory/) .

The Allowance closed to new applications in January 1997. Some women have
continued to get Deserted Wife’s Allowance because they qualified for the
payment before 2 January 1997 and continue to meet the qualifying criteria
which include:

  * You must not be cohabiting with any person 
  * You have not resumed living with your husband 
  * You must satisfy a means test 

You can find more information about the [ rules for keeping for your Deserted
Wife’s Allowance ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/cc70a0-operational-
guidelines-deserted-wifes-allowance/) .

You must always tell the DSP if there are any [ changes to your circumstances
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/changes-that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/) while you are
getting a Deserted Wife's Allowance. If your means or circumstances change you
may no longer qualify for the payment or it may be reduced. This could mean
that you have to [ repay an overpayment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-welfare-overpayments/)
.

##  Rates

Deserted Wife's Allowance maximum rate is €232 per week in 2024.

##  How to apply

It is no longer possible to apply for Deserted Wife's Allowance. The payment
has been closed to new applicants since January 1997.

If you are getting Deserted Wife's Allowance, you may be entitled to [ extra
benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/extra-social-
welfare-benefits/) from the Department of Social Protection (DSP) including
Living Alone Allowance and the Household Benefits Package when you turn 66.

##  Where to apply

For more information about Deserted Wife's Allowance contact:

###  Department of Social Protection

Deserted Wife's Payments Section

College Road  
Sligo  
Ireland

**Tel:** (071) 915 7100

**Locall:** 0818 200 400 (Note: the rates charged for using 0818 (Lo-call)
numbers may vary)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e2eef5-deserted-wifes-allowance/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e2eef5-deserted-wifes-allowance/)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/0e1ac5-deserted-wifes-benefit/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/0e1ac5-deserted-wifes-benefit/)

_**Page edited:** 4 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wifes-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Deserted%20Wife%27s%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wifes-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wifes-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Deserted%20Wife%27s%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wifes-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Deserted Wife's Benefit_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wife-s-payments/)

Deserted Wife’s Benefit is a social insurance payment made to women who were
deserted by their husbands. This payment closed to new applicants in January
1997. Some women, however, continue to get a deserted wife's payment.

1517.4866

  * [ _Means test for Jobseeker's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/)

To get Jobseeker's Allowance you must satisfy a means test. A means test
examines all your sources of income. However, some income is not included when
calculating your means.

1214.7903

  * [ _Payment for people who retire at 65_ ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/payment-for-people-retired-at-65/)

If you retire at 65, you may qualify for a benefit payment until you reach 66.
The payment is similar to Jobseeker’s Benefit, but you don’t need to be
looking for work or sign on at your local Intreo centre.

989.8298

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

