**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) >
Payments for unemployed people

#  Payments for unemployed people

  * [ Self-employed and unemployment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-unemployment/)

If your business has closed, or if you are self-employed but have less work
and less income than before, you may qualify for a social welfare payment.

  * [ Signing on ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/signing-on/)

If you lose your job or are unemployed you may get a social welfare payment.
Information about the process of signing on for a jobseeker's payment.

  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)

This is a weekly payment to people who have lost their job and are covered by
social insurance.

  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)

A means-tested payment to people who are unemployed and looking for work.

  * [ Signing off when you start work ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/signing-off/)

You are required to notify your Intreo Centre or local Social Welfare Branch
Office if you have been claiming social welfare benefits and are returning to
work.

  * [ COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-payment/)

The COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment was for employees and self-employed
people who had lost employment during the COVID-19 public health emergency.

  * [ Employment services for jobseekers ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/)

Read about the employment services and supports available to jobseekers in
Ireland.

  * [ Information for younger jobseekers ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/)

Younger jobseekers must meet the same conditions as all other jobseekers but
there are some targeted supports to help them into work.

  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/)

Jobseeker’s Benefit (Self-Employed) is a payment to support people who lose
their self-employment.

  * [ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/)

The Jobseeker's Transitional payment is a special payment for lone parents
whose youngest child is aged between 7 and 13 years. Read about the payment
and how to apply.

  * [ Older people and jobseeker's payments ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/older-jobseekers/)

An overview of the special provisions that apply to older jobseekers and
people who retire early.

  * [ Professional artists on Jobseekers Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance-professional-artists/)

A scheme for professional artists on Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) that allows
you to focus on your artistic work and develop your portfolio.

  * [ Rules for getting a jobseeker's payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/)

The conditions you must meet to get a jobseeker’s payment and the penalties
that apply if you do not meet these conditions.

  * [ Means test for Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test-for-jobseekers-allowance/)

To get Jobseeker's Allowance you must satisfy a means test. A means test
examines all your sources of income. However, some income is not included when
calculating your means.

**This document is in:** [ Means test for social welfare payments
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/)

  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance and work ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/)

Explains how your income from work and your spouse's income from work can
affect your rate of Jobseeker's Allowance.

**This document is in:** [ Means test for social welfare payments
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-
welfare-payments/)

  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit and work ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/jobseekers-benefit-and-work/)

You may be able to work and get Jobseeker's Benefit. This page explains how
work affects your Jobseeker's Benefit.

**This document is in:** [ Social welfare payments and work ](/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/)

###  Most Read in "Payments for unemployed people"

  1. [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)
  2. [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  3. [ Signing on ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/signing-on/)
  4. [ Rules for getting a jobseeker's payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/)
  5. [ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/)

