**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/) > Homemaker's Scheme

#  Homemaker's Scheme

  * What is the Homemaker's Scheme? 
  * Do I qualify for the Homemaker's Scheme? 
  * What counts as a ‘homemaking year'? 
  * Getting other social welfare payments 
  * How to apply for the Homemaker's Scheme 
  * More information about the Homemaker's Scheme 

##  What is the Homemaker's Scheme?

The Homemaker's Scheme can help you qualify for the [ State Pension
(Contributory) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-
and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) if you are a man or woman who
cares full-time for:

  * A child under age 12, or 
  * An ill or disabled person aged 12 or over. 

###  **How does it work?**

To qualify for the State Pension (Contributory), you may need a certain number
of [ yearly average PRSI contributions
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-
contributory/#89a956:~:text=3.%20Yearly%20average%20or%20total%20number%20of%20contributions)
between starting work and reaching pension age.

But, with the Homemaker’s Scheme, the Department of Social Protection (DSP)
can ignore up to 20 years you spent as a homemaker after 6 April 1994. The DSP
calls these your ‘Homemaking years’.

This can help you to qualify for a State Pension (Contributory) or get a
higher rate of pension.

You must have 520 paid contributions when you reach pension age to use the
Homemaker's Scheme to calculate your State Pension (Contributory).

###  **Can I swap my ‘homemaker’ status with my spouse?**

Only one person in the home can be a homemaker at a time.

If you stop being a homemaker and your spouse or civil partner takes up
homemaking duties, you should tell the Department of Social Protection (DSP)
immediately. This is to make sure there is no loss of entitlements under the
Homemaker's Scheme.

##  Do I qualify for the Homemaker's Scheme?

You qualify for the Homemaker’s Scheme if you:

  * Have previously been employed or self-employed (you must have at least one paid contribution before your first homemaking period) 
  * Do not work full-time while caring (you can do part-time work with gross weekly earnings of less than €38, or be self-employed with a yearly income of less than €5,000) 
  * Are aged over 16, and under pension age 
  * Care full-time for a child under 12, or for an ill or disabled person 
  * Permanently live in Ireland (except in cases where provisions under EU or posted worker regulations apply) 
  * Are not living in a hospital, convalescent home, or other similar institution 

###  **Caring for someone aged 12 or over**

Before 26 October 2000, you had to live with the person you were caring for.

Now, you don’t have to live with the person you care for if:

  * You have a direct system of communication with them, for example, a phone or alarm system _,_ **and**
  * The person does not get full-time care and attention within their own home from anyone else. 

To qualify for the scheme, the person you care for must be so disabled or
incapacitated that they need either:

  * Continuous supervision to avoid danger to themself, **or**
  * Continuous supervision and frequent assistance throughout the day in connection with their normal personal needs (such as getting around, eating, drinking, or dressing). 

###  **Time spent on holidays**

You can take holidays abroad of 2 to 3 weeks, without this affecting your
homemaker status.

###  **Time spent in hospital**

If you, or if the person you care for, is having medical treatment in a
hospital (or other treatment in an institution) for up to 13 weeks, you are
still regarded as providing full-time care.

###  **Time spent in rehabilitation or day care**

You are still regarded as providing full-time care and attention if the person
you care for attends either:

  * A non-residential course of rehabilitation training, or 
  * A non-residential day care centre approved by the Minister for Health. 

##  What counts as a ‘homemaking year'?

A ‘homemaking year’ is any year in which you are out of the workforce for the
full tax year. Only a full year can be disregarded.

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) can disregard up to 20 homemaking
years when calculating your State Pension (Contributory).

###  **Homemaker’s credits**

If you are a homemaker for part of a year (either at the start or the end of
your homemaking period), you can get [ credited contributions
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) :

  * From the date you become a homemaker, to the end of that tax year 
  * From the start of your final year as a homemaker, to the date you stop homemaking. 

###  **Example of a person’s insurance record using the Homemaker’s Scheme**

Mary left the workforce in 1997 to care for her newborn child.

The child:

  * Was born on 10 November 1997, and 
  * Had their 12th birthday on 10 November 2009. 

So, Mary’s homemaking period is from 10 November 1997 until 10 November 2009.

**Mary's insurance record under the Homemaker’s Scheme**  
---  
**From:** |  **To:** |  **Mary’s insurance record:**  
10 November 1997  |  31 December 1997  |  Mary gets credited contributions from the date her baby is born, up to the end of the tax year   
1 January 1998  |  31 December 2008  |  The DSP counts this time as full homemaking years for Mary   
1 January 2009  |  10 November 2009  |  Mary gets credited contributions up to her child's 12th birthday   
  
##  Getting other social welfare payments

You can get [ Child Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) and still be considered a
homemaker if you are out of the workforce and not getting [ credited
contributions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-
contributions/) from the Department of Social Protection (DSP).

###  **Carer’s payments**

If you get [ Carer’s Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) and are not entitled to credits under that
scheme, you may be entitled to have homemaking years taken into account for
the [ State Pension (Contributory)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-contributory/) .

If you get the [ Carer’s Support Grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-support-
grant/) , you may be entitled to have homemaking years taken into account for
the State Pension (Contributory).

###  **Illness-related payments**

If you are getting [ Invalidity Pension
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/invalidity-pension/) or [ Illness Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/disability-benefit/) , you must get a medical certificate to show that
you can provide the required care.

##  How to apply for the Homemaker's Scheme

If you think you qualify for the Homemaker’s Scheme, you should:

  * Fill in the ‘Pension Caring Support’ application form 
  * Gather your [ supporting documents ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/7e5b13-operational-guidelines-homemakers-scheme/#:~:text=Documentation,the%20required%20care.) (such as birth certs and medical certs) 
  * Send your application and supporting documents to the ‘Pension Caring Support Section’ of the DSP (see postal address under ‘More information’ below). 

**Note:** The new ‘Pension Caring Support’ application form is not yet
available online. In the meantime, applicants can email
pensioncaringsupports@welfare.ie or LoCall 0818 690690.

###  **When to apply for the Homemaker's Scheme**

You should register as a homemaker before the end of the contribution year,
**after** **the year** in which you first become a homemaker.

For example, if you first become a homemaker in 2024, you should apply for the
Homemaker’s Scheme before the end of 2025.

###  **Late claims**

Your application may be backdated if you can prove you met the qualifying
conditions during that time, and that there was good reason for your delay in
making the claim.

##  More information about the Homemaker's Scheme

You can read [ detailed information about the Homemaker's Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/7e5b13-operational-guidelines-homemakers-
scheme/) on Gov.ie.

When applying to be registered as a homemaker, send your application form and
supporting documents to:

###  Pension Caring Supports Section

Department of Social Protection  
McCarter’s Road,  
Buncrana,  
Co. Donegal,  
F93 CH79

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 (or, if calling from outside Ireland, dial +353 1 471
5898)

**Locall:** 0818 690 690

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f64f2-long-term-carers-and-
state-pension-contributory/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f64f2-long-
term-carers-and-state-pension-contributory/)

**Email:** [ pensioncaringsupports@welfare.ie
](mailto:pensioncaringsupports@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 16 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/homemakers-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Homemaker%27s%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/homemakers-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/homemakers-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Homemaker%27s%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/homemakers-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Adapting a home for an older or disabled person_ ](/en/housing/building-or-altering-a-home/adapting-a-home-for-an-older-or-disabled-person/)

Your home may need alterations to suit the changing needs of an older or
disabled person. Information on grants and other supports.

1597.2965

  * [ _Schemes for houses affected by pyrite or mica_ ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/local-authority-housing-grants-and-supports/schemes-for-houses-affected-by-pyrite-or-mica/)

Many houses in Ireland have been affected by defective building materials.
Find out about the redress schemes available to repair and rebuild affected
homes.

1350.8839

  * [ _Part-time fee scheme for undergraduate courses_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-courses/)

The part-time fee scheme is a financial support scheme for students studying
certain part-time undergraduate courses in Ireland and abroad.

1186.3335

  * [ _Vaccinations for children and young people_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/)

Vaccination and immunisation services for children are free of charge.

1084.5469

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

