**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/) > Claiming an extra half-
rate social welfare payment

#  Claiming an extra half-rate social welfare payment

  * Introduction 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

It is generally only possible to claim one personal social assistance or
social insurance payment at a time in Ireland. However, in some circumstances,
you can keep your personal payment and get half of another social welfare
payment.

If you are getting certain social welfare payments and you are providing full-
time care and attention to another person, you can keep your main social
welfare payment and get half-rate Carer’s Allowance as well. More information
can be found in our document about [ qualifying for half-rate Carer's
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/) .

[ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-
pension/) can be paid with certain other social welfare payments provided you
meet the conditions for both payments.

You can get a half-rate Maternity, Paternity, Adoptive, Parent's or Health and
Safety Benefit payment if you are claiming one of the following social welfare
payments:

  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * Death benefits or survivor's benefits under the [ Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/) , such as Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension and Dependant Parent Pension. 

In addition, you must satisfy the social insurance contribution and other
conditions for [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/maternity-benefit/) , [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/) , [ Adoptive Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/) , [ Parent's
Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/) , or [
Health and Safety Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-
safety-benefit/) . If you meet these conditions you will get half the personal
rate of payment, with no additional increases for children.

##  Rates

**Weekly half-rate payment rates 2024**

**Social insurance payment** |  **Half-rate**  
---|---  
Maternity Benefit (standard rate €274)  |  €137   
Paternity Benefit (standard rate €274)  |  €137   
Adoptive Benefit (standard rate €274)  |  €137   
Health and Safety Benefit (maximum rate €232)  |  €116   
  
If you are working and on a reduced social welfare payment, you may get more
than half-rate Maternity, Paternity, Adoptive or Health and Safety Benefit
when you stop working.

##  How to apply

To claim half of an additional social welfare payment, you apply in the normal
way. You should fill out the correct payment application form and return it to
the Department of Social Protection. The return address is printed on the
application form.

_**Page edited:** 15 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[ ](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Claiming%20an%20extra%20half-
rate%20social%20welfare%20payment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[ ](mailto:?subject=Claiming%20an%20extra%20half-
rate%20social%20welfare%20payment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Claiming a social welfare payment_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-a-social-welfare-payment/)

Explains how to claim a social welfare payment and where you can get help to
fill in the application form.

2946.4211

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2890.0479

  * [ _Capital and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/)

Capital for Irish social welfare purposes includes property, savings and
investments. Find out how to assess income from capital for social welfare
payments.

2836.5679

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

