**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/) > Social insurance classes

#  Social insurance classes

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 
  * Social insurance classes 

##  Introduction

People in employment pay contributions to the Social Insurance Fund. The
contribution you pay depends on your earnings and occupation. This is why it
is called a Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) contribution. Some people who
have unearned income are also liable for PRSI. There are currently 11
different PRSI classes. They are A, B, C, D, E, H, J, K, M, S and P - see
'Social insurance classes' below.

The social insurance payments you can get depend on the PRSI class you are in.

[ Each PRSI class is divided into different subclasses
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/14ecbe-the-different-classes-of-pay-
related-social-insurance-prsi/) . These subclasses do not affect your
entitlements under the social insurance system. They only relate to the amount
of PRSI which you or your employer must pay.

**How is PRSI calculated?**

PRSI is calculated on your _reckonable pay_ . Reckonable pay is your gross pay
including any notional pay (or [ benefit in kind ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-benefits-from-employment/) ,) if applicable.
There is no PRSI relief for employers on pension contributions made by
employees. There is some PRSI relief on pension contributions paid by
employers.

A wide range of payments are available to people who have paid social
insurance. If you are not a Class A contributor, you can't get the full range
of social insurance payments. This is because you are paying less towards
social insurance than a Class A contributor. In certain cases, if your income
falls below a certain amount, you do not have to pay a social insurance
contribution, however, you will still be covered by social insurance because
your employer must pay social insurance for you. More information is available
in our page [ Paying social insurance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) .

###  PRSI contribution week

Your working week may not be the same as the PRSI contribution week. The PRSI
contribution week starts on 1 January each year. Week one is the period from 1
January to 7 January, week two is from 8 January to 14 January and so on. For
2024, it started on Monday and ended on Sunday. [ The contribution week can
affect the social insurance cover of part-time workers and people job-sharing
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-
time-work-and-social-insurance-prsi/) .

**COVID-19 payments**

If you got COVID-19 payments – either the [ COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment
Payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-
payment/) or Revenue’s wage subsidy schemes (including the [ Temporary Wage
Subsidy Scheme ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/covid19-temporary-
wage-subsidy-scheme/) , the Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme and the Employer
COVID-19 Refund Scheme) – you will be awarded PRSI contributions at the class
you were paying immediately before you were laid off, while you got the
COVID-19 payment or scheme.

##  Rules

###  PRSI classes and people insured in each class

Most people pay Class A PRSI.

Class A applies to employees under age 66 with reckonable pay of €38 or more
per week from all employments. Class A also applies to public servants
recruited since 6 April 1995 and employees age 66 to 70 (born after 1 January
1958) who are not getting a State Pension (Contributory).

Class A does not apply to people over 70 years of age and in insurable
employment. They are insurable under Class J.

You can get more information about social insurance classes and the
occupations covered by each class in 'Social insurance classes' below.

##  Rates

The [ amount of PRSI you and your employer pay ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) will
depend on your earnings and the class you are insured under.

###  Class A tapered credit

A weekly tapered PRSI credit of €12 is available for employees insured at
Class A whose earnings are between €352.01 and €424 in a week. The maximum
PRSI credit of €12 per week applies to gross weekly earnings of €352.01. A
person earning €352.01 pays €14.08 PRSI (4%). After the €12 credit is deducted
they will pay PRSI of €2.08. For people earning between €352.01 and €424, the
credit of €12 is reduced by one-sixth of earnings over €352.01. There is no
PRSI credit once earnings exceed €424.

###  PRSI refunds

If the wrong rate of PRSI is deducted from your wages you are entitled to a
refund. There are a number of reasons why you might be paying the wrong PRSI
rate.

To get a refund, either you or your employer should contact the Refunds
Section in the Department of Social Protection (DSP) - see 'Where to apply'
below. You will be sent a refund application form to fill out. If you have
paid too much PRSI, you will get a refund and the Department will correct your
social insurance record.

##  How to apply

If you are an employee, your employer deducts your PRSI contribution from your
wages. Your employer then submits your contribution and their employer's
contribution to the Revenue Commissioners. [ Your employer must also pay
social insurance on your behalf ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) .

If you are self-employed, you pay [ Class S social insurance ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-prsi/) . In
this case, you pay your social insurance contributions directly to the Revenue
Commissioners.

If you are a PAYE worker and have unearned income of over €5,000 you are a
chargeable person and you must pay 4% PRSI under Revenue's self-assessment
system (Pay and File). Revenue pay the money into the Social Insurance Fund. A
record of the contributions you have paid is then sent to the DSP.

##  Where to apply

**If there is a problem in deciding what class of social insurance you should
pay, contact:  
**

###  Scope Section

Department of Social Protection

Áras Mhic Dhiarmada,  
Store Street,  
Dublin 1,  
D01 WY03

**Opening Hours:** 9am-5pm

**Tel:** (01) 673 2585

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a07d6-operational-
guidelines-scope-section-insurability-for-prsi-purposes/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a07d6-operational-guidelines-scope-
section-insurability-for-prsi-purposes/)

**Email:** [ scope@welfare.ie ](mailto:scope@welfare.ie)

**Information relating to your social insurance record in Ireland is available
from:  
**

###  PRSI Records

Department of Social Protection

McCarter's Road  
Ardaravan  
Buncrana  
Donegal  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 or 0818 690 690

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/80e5ab-prsi-pay-related-
social-insurance/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/80e5ab-prsi-pay-related-
social-insurance/)

**Email:** [ contributionstatement@welfare.ie
](mailto:contributionstatement@welfare.ie)

**If you have overpaid PRSI contributions, you can apply for a refund to:**

###  PRSI Refund Section

Department of Social Protection

Gandon House  
Amiens Street  
Dublin 1  
Ireland  
D01 A361

**Tel:** (01) 673 2586

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5706e5-prsi-refunds/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5706e5-prsi-refunds/)

##  Social insurance classes

There are 11 different social insurance classes in Ireland. They are as
follows:

**Class A** applies to people in industrial, commercial and service type
employment who are employed under a contract of service with a reckonable pay
of €38 or more per week from employment. It also includes civil and public
servants recruited from 6 April 1995. In fact, most employees in Ireland pay
PRSI Class A. People on CE schemes pay a special contribution at Class A8/A9.

**Class J** applies to people earning less than €38 per week. However, people
aged over 70 or people in subsidiary employment are always insurable at Class
J, no matter how much they earn. Subsidiary employment for Class J is for
example, people who are insurable at Class B, C, D or H in their main
employment. Only Occupational Injuries Benefit is covered by Class J social
insurance.

**Class E** applies to ministers of religion employed by the Church of Ireland
Representative Body. It covers all social insurance payments except
Jobseeker's Benefit and Occupational Injuries Benefit.

**Class B** applies to civil servants and Gardaí recruited before 6 April
1995, and registered doctors and dentists employed in the Civil Service. It
covers only a limited number of social insurance payments.

**Class C** applies to commissioned Army Officers and members of the Army
Nursing service recruited before 6 April 1995. It covers only a limited number
of social insurance benefits.

**Class D** applies to permanent and pensionable employees in the public
service other than those mentioned in Classes B and C recruited before 6 April
1995. It covers only a limited number of social insurance payments.

**Class H** applies to NCOs and enlisted personnel of the Defence Forces. It
covers all social insurance payments except Occupational Injuries Benefit.

**Class K** applies to public office holders with an income of over €5,200 a
year. Public office holders with weekly income of €100 or less are recorded
under Class M. Class K also applies to people who pay PRSI on unearned income.
There are no social insurance payments for people insured under Class K.

**Class M** applies to employees with no liability to contribute to social
insurance such as employees under 16 years of age, people of pensionable age,
currently 66 years or over (including people previously liable for Class S),
people with an income of €500 or less and insured in Class K, people getting
an occupational pension (on the Occupational Pension income only) or people
within Class K with no contribution liability.

Class M covers certain contributors with Occupational Injuries Benefit.

**Class S** applies to self-employed people including certain company
directors, people in business on their own account and people with income from
investments and rents. [ It covers a limited number of social insurance
payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/class-s-prsi/) .

**Class P** applies to sharefishermen or sharefisherwomen who are classified
as self-employed and who are already paying PRSI under Class S. It covers them
for limited Jobseeker's Benefit, limited Illness Benefit and Treatment
Benefit.

If there is a problem in deciding what class of social insurance you should
pay, the Scope Section in the DSP may decide the issue after examining your
employment situation.

If there is a problem in deciding what class of social insurance you should
pay, contact the Scope section in the DSP (see 'Where to apply' above)

_**Page edited:** 18 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20insurance%20classes&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20insurance%20classes&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-
classes/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Part-time work and social insurance (PRSI)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-time-work-and-social-insurance-prsi/)

This page explains how part-time work can affect your PRSI contributions.

1899.3787

  * [ _Paying social insurance (PRSI)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/)

Paying PRSI can entitle you to certain social welfare benefits. The law makes
your employer responsible for PRSI. This document explains your employer's
duty to pay PRSI.

1781.3494

  * [ _Social insurance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/)

Social insurance contributions entitle you to a range of benefits administered
by the Department of Social Protection.

1713.891

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

