**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Carers' payments ](/en/social-welfare/carers/) > Carer's Benefit

#  Carer's Benefit

  * What is Carer’s Benefit? 
  * How to qualify for Carer’s Benefit 
  * What is full-time care? 
  * Work and Carer’s Benefit 
  * Rate of Carer’s Benefit 
  * How to apply for Carer’s Benefit 
  * Where to apply for Carer’s Benefit 

##  What is Carer’s Benefit?

Carer's Benefit is paid to people who leave work or reduce their hours to care
for a person in need of full-time care.

To get Carer’s Benefit, you must be under 66 and have enough social insurance
(PRSI) contributions (see ‘How to qualify for Carer’s Benefit’ below).

You can get Carer's Benefit for 2 years (104 weeks) for each person that you
are caring for.

You can take the 104 weeks all together or any number of separate weeks up to
a total of 104 weeks. However, if you claim Carer's Benefit for less than 6
weeks in a row, you must wait another 6 weeks before you can get Carer's
Benefit for the same person again.

If you are caring for more than one person, you can get a payment for 104
weeks for each person. If the care periods occur at the same time, you will
get an increase in your Carer’s Benefit for caring for more than one person
(see ‘Rate of Carer’s Benefit’ below).

If you get Carer’s Benefit, you can also get a [ GP visit card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) .

You may also get a [ Carer's Support Grant ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-
support-grant/) . It is a payment made once a year to carers. It is paid on
the first Thursday in June each year.

###  Carer's leave

Carer's leave allows you to leave your employment for up to 104 weeks to
provide full-time care to a person in need of full-time care. The leave is
unpaid, but your job must be kept for you to return to at the end of your [
carer’s leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/carers-leave/) . You do not have to qualify for Carer's Benefit to
get carer's leave.

##  How to qualify for Carer’s Benefit

You may get Carer's Benefit if:

  * You are 16 or over 
  * You have enough social insurance (PRSI) contributions (see 'PRSI contributions' below) 
  * You have been employed for at least 8 weeks in the previous 26-weeks for a minimum of 16 hours each week or 32 hours a fortnight (you don't have to meet this rule if you were getting Carer's Benefit in the previous 26 weeks) 
  * You are not living in a hospital, convalescent home or other similar institution 
  * The person being cared for needs full-time care and is not living in a hospital, convalescent home or other similar institution (see ‘What is full-time care?’ below) 
  * You are not employed, self-employed, doing voluntary work, training or any education courses for more than 18.5 hours a week (see ‘Work and Carer’s Benefit’ below) 
  * You don't earn over €450 per week after tax 

####  Illness Benefit before applying for Carer’s Benefit

If you are getting Illness Benefit before you apply for Carer’s Benefit, the 8
weeks of employment needed to qualify will be based on the 26-week period
before you started getting Illness Benefit.

###  PRSI contribution conditions

To get Carer’s Benefit, you must have at least 156 contributions paid at any
time since you first started work (entered into the social insurance PRSI
system). You must also have:

  * 39 contributions paid in the relevant tax year, **or**
  * 39 contributions paid in the 12-month period before the start of Carer's Benefit, **or**
  * 26 contributions paid in the relevant tax year and 26 contributions paid in the year before that. 

The relevant tax year is the second last complete tax year before the year in
which you make your claim for Carer’s Benefit. So, for claims made in 2024,
the relevant tax year is 2022.

Only contributions at Class A, B, C, D, H and E are counted towards Carer's
Benefit. Class S (self-employed contributions) do not count.

Social insurance in another EU member state and the UK may be used to meet the
PRSI contribution rules. Your last week social insurance contribution must be
paid in Ireland.

You are awarded [ credited contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/)
or _credits_ automatically when you are getting Carer's Benefit. Credits are
awarded at the same rate as your last paid contribution. These credits help
protect your future entitlement to social welfare benefits and pensions.

##  What is full-time care?

To get Carer’s Benefit, you must be providing full-time care to a person who
needs full-time care.

A person is seen as needing full-time care when:

  * They need continual supervision to avoid danger to themselves 

Or

  * They need continual supervision and frequent assistance throughout the day with normal bodily functions. For example, help to walk and get about, eat or drink, get washed or dressed. 

The Department of Social Protection will decide if the person needs full-time
care.

The person being cared for must have their doctor complete, sign and stamp the
Medical Report which is part of the Carer’s Benefit application form – see
‘How to apply for Carer's Benefit’ below.

This Medical Report is not needed if the person being cared for is a child who
is getting [ Domiciliary Care Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/) . You may get Carer’s Benefit even if you
are not the person getting the Domiciliary Care Allowance for the child.

###  **Going to hospital, respite care or day care**

You or the person needing care must not be living in a hospital or
institution. However, you can continue to be seen as providing full-time care
if you or the person being cared for is having medical or other treatment in a
hospital or institution for not longer than 13 weeks.

You can also continue to be seen as providing full-time care if the person
being cared for is attending non-residential rehabilitation training or a day
care centre.

**Baby in hospital after birth**

If your baby is kept in hospital, or another institution, to get medical
treatment immediately after their birth, you can get Carer’s Benefit for up to
18 months while they are in hospital. In this case, your baby must meet the
criteria for [ Domiciliary Care Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/) .

**Child in hospital**

You can get Carer’s Benefit for up to 26 weeks in a 12-month period while your
child is in hospital or another institution getting medical, or other
treatment, of a temporary nature. In this case, your child must meet the
criteria for [ Domiciliary Care Allowance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/) .

###  **If you are away**

If you are away, you must be able to arrange full-time care for the person you
care for.

###  **Payment after a death**

If the person you are caring for dies, your Carer's Benefit payment will
continue for 6 weeks following the death.

##  Work and Carer’s Benefit

If you are getting Carer’s Benefit, you must not work (this includes self-
employment and voluntary work) or take part in a training or education course
for more than 18.5 hours a week.

The maximum amount you can earn and get Carer’s Benefit is €450 a week after
tax.

This is your income after you take the following from your total wage:

  * Income tax 
  * Universal Social Charge 
  * PRSI, superannuation (pension payments) 
  * Pension levy 
  * Union dues 
  * Subscriptions to Friendly Societies 
  * Any health insurance contract premium 

##  Rate of Carer’s Benefit

**Weekly** **Carer’s Benefit rates 2024**

**Carer** |  **Maximum weekly rate** |  **Increase for a child dependant**  
---|---|---  
Caring for 1 person  |  €249  |  Child under 12 years of age:  €46 (full rate), €23 (half rate)  Child aged 12 and over:  €54 (full rate), €27 (half rate)   
Caring for more than 1 person  |  €373.50   
  
You may get an increase in your Carer’s Benefit payment if you have a [ child
dependent ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/)
. If your child is in full-time education, you may get this increase until the
end of the academic year in which the child reaches 22.

Carer's Benefit is [ taxable ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)
.

##  How to apply for Carer’s Benefit

To apply, fill in [ an application form for Carer's Benefit (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/19923/2847745f86944188b90be0e885bf4a01.pdf) . You can
get this form (CARB1) from [ your local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch
Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) or
from the Carer's Benefit Section - see 'Where to apply' below.

The Department of Social Protection recommends that you apply for Carer’s
Benefit 10 weeks before you leave employment, if possible.

  * Parts 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Carer’s Benefit form should be completed by you. 
  * Part 4 should be completed, signed and stamped by your employer. 
  * Part 10 should be completed by the person getting care from you and their doctor should complete, sign and stamp the Medical Report. 

If you are applying for Carer's Benefit for a second person, you should use [
the application form CARB2 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/73468/4c7792255472461b87e546dc5bfd5a56.pdf) .

If you think you have been wrongly refused Carer's Benefit, you can [ appeal
this decision ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
appeals/) .

##  Where to apply for Carer’s Benefit

For more information on Carer's Benefit, contact your Intreo Centre, Social
Welfare Branch Office or:

###  Carer's Benefit Section

Department of Social Protection

Social Welfare Services Office  
Government Buildings  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
Ireland

**Tel:** (043) 334 0000 or 0818 927 770

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/455c16-carers-benefit/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/455c16-carers-benefit/)

**Email:** [ Carersbenefit@welfare.ie ](mailto:Carersbenefit@welfare.ie)

For more information on carer's leave, contact:

###  Workplace Relations Commission - Information and Customer Service

O'Brien Road  
Carlow  
R93 E920

**Opening Hours:** Mon. to Fri. 9.30am to 1pm, 2pm to 5pm

**Tel:** (059) 917 8990

**Locall:** 0818 80 80 90

**Homepage:** [ https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/
](https://www.workplacerelations.ie/en/)

_**Page edited:** 9 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Carer%27s%20Benefit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Carer%27s%20Benefit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Payments to carers_ ](/en/social-welfare/carers/payments-to-carers/)

Find out about the different payments and benefits for carers.

1166.5825

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

1071.7548

  * [ _Case study: Jobseeker’s Benefit and systematic short time work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-work/)

This is a case study showing you how to calculate the length of time a
systematic short time worker can get Jobseeker's Benefit.

1003.24304

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

