**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/) > Examples of how social
welfare payments are taxed

#  Examples of how social welfare payments are taxed

  * Taxation of Maternity Benefit, Adoptive Benefit and Paternity Benefit 
  * More examples of how Maternity Benefit is taxed 
  * Taxation of Illness Benefit and Injury Benefit 
  * Taxation of Jobseeker’s Benefit and One-Parent Family Payment 
  * More information 

##  Taxation of Maternity Benefit, Adoptive Benefit and Paternity Benefit

If you get [ Maternity Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/) , [
Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/)
, [ Paternity Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/) , [
Parent’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/)
and [ Health and Safety Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/) , you are liable to pay
income tax. The actual rate of tax you pay depends on your personal
circumstances and the tax reliefs and tax credits you are claiming.

You do not pay Universal Social Charge (USC) and PRSI.

###  Example

**The following example explains how** [ **Maternity Benefit** ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/) **is taxed. The same rules
also apply to** [ **Adoptive Benefit** ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/adoptive-benefit/) **,** [ **Paternity Benefit** ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/) **,** [ **Parent’s Benefit**
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/) **, and** [
**Health and Safety Benefit** ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/health-safety-benefit/) **.**

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) pays Maternity Benefit without
deducting tax. However, the DSP will tell Revenue the amount of Maternity
Benefit you are getting.

If you pay tax through [ the PAYE system ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-
tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/) , Revenue will (where possible) automatically
reduce your annual tax credits and rate bands to account for the tax payable
on your Maternity Benefit (see more examples of how Maternity Benefit is taxed
below).

If you are self-employed and [ pay your tax through the self-assessment system
](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-people/) , you
should include details of any Maternity Benefit received in your annual tax
return.

You can read more detailed information on [ how Maternity Benefit, Adoptive
Benefit, Paternity Benefit, Parent’s Benefit, and Health and Safety Benefit
are taxed (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-tax-
capital-gains-tax-corporation-tax/part-05/05-05-31.pdf) on Revenue's website.

##  More examples of how Maternity Benefit is taxed

If you pay tax through the PAYE system and you qualify for Maternity Benefit,
you will probably fall into one of the following 3 categories:

###  **1\. You are paid your full or partial salary by your employer and your
Maternity Benefit is paid directly to them.**

Revenue will reduce your tax credits and rate band to account for the tax
payable on your Maternity Benefit, and in this way collect the tax due.
Revenue will then send a revised tax credit certificate to your employer. Your
employer should only deduct tax, USC and PRSI on the difference between the
salary paid and Maternity Benefit.

###  **2\. You are paid your full or partial salary by your employer and your
Maternity Benefit is paid directly to you.**

Revenue will reduce your tax credits and rate band to account for the tax
payable on your Maternity Benefit. Your employer should deduct tax, USC and
PRSI only on the amount of salary actually paid by them.

###  **3\. You do not get any salary while on maternity leave and your
Maternity Benefit is paid directly to you.**

Revenue will reduce your tax credits and rate band to account for the tax
payable on your Maternity Benefit. They will then send a revised tax credit
certificate to your employer. If your only income is Maternity Benefit, you
will probably pay very little or no tax (since your total tax credits will
probably exceed your total tax liability).

If you are not entitled to any pay on the usual pay day, you may contact your
employer to request repayment of any tax that might be due. Alternatively,
when you go back to work after maternity leave, any refund of tax which may be
due can be calculated.

####  More information

You can find more information in our [ Case Study: Taxation of Maternity
Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-
checklists/case-study-taxation-of-maternity-benefit/) .

##  Taxation of Illness Benefit and Injury Benefit

If you are absent from work due to illness and you get (or your employer gets
on your behalf) [ Illness Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/disability-benefit/) or [ Injury Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/disability-and-illness/injury-benefit/) , Revenue will take account
of the amount of Illness or Injury Benefit paid when they adjust your tax
credits or review the tax affairs of your spouse or civil partner.

You do not pay PRSI or USC.

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) tells Revenue the amount of taxable
Illness or Injury Benefit you are getting, and the date the payment started.
DSP does not tell your employer the amount of Illness or Injury Benefit you
are getting.

##  Taxation of Jobseeker’s Benefit and One-Parent Family Payment

If you work and get [ Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) , the taxable part of your JB
is collected by adjusting your tax credits and standard rate cut off point to
account for the tax payable.

The [ One-Parent Family Payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) is taxed in the
same way. You don’t pay PRSI or USC.

##  More information

Read our page about [ taxation of social welfare payments ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/) .

If you have a question about your tax liability, you should [ contact Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact/index.html) . You can also visit Revenue's
website for more information on the [ taxation of social welfare payments
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/taxation-of-social-welfare-
payments/index.aspx) .

You may also want to [ contact your local Citizens Information Centre
](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) , to speak with an Information
Officer.

_**Page edited:** 23 February 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-
taxed/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Examples%20of%20how%20social%20welfare%20payments%20are%20taxed&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-
taxed/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-
taxed/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Examples%20of%20how%20social%20welfare%20payments%20are%20taxed&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-
taxed/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How social welfare payments are paid_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-social-welfare-payments-are-paid/)

Find out how social welfare payments are paid.

3032.8574

  * [ _Taxation of social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

Find out which social welfare payments are taxable, and which payments are
not.

2311.545

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2004.4678

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

