**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Means test for social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/) > Maintenance and
social welfare payments

#  Maintenance and social welfare payments

  * What is maintenance? 
  * What maintenance is assessed as means? 
  * How maintenance is assessed for Rent Supplement 
  * How maintenance is assessed for Working Family Payment 
  * How maintenance is assessed for a child with a means-tested social assistance payment 

##  What is maintenance?

Parents, whether married or not, must support their dependent children.
Similarly, spouses and civil partners must support each other according to
their financial ability. If partners separate, one person may pay maintenance
to the other person, to help them with living costs.

Maintenance can be paid voluntarily, or as a result of a ‘maintenance order’
granted by the courts. You can read more about [ how to apply for maintenance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/maintenance-orders-and-agreements/) .

This page explains how maintenance is assessed in the [ means test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) for a social
assistance payment.

##  What maintenance is assessed as means?

If you are applying for a [ social assistance payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-assistance-payments/social-assistance-in-ireland/) , you must
pass a means test. The Department of Social Protection (DSP) looks at all your
sources of income, such as:

  * Wages from employment 
  * Capital (savings and investments) 
  * Other cash income 
  * Maintenance (excluding child maintenance) 

If you are getting maintenance from more than one person, it will be added
together, and the total will be assessed as means. The DSP also takes
maintenance paid to your spouse, civil partner, or cohabitant is into account.

###  **Maintenance not taken into account**

Since 4 June 2024, child maintenance payments are not included in the means
test for social assistance payments. However, if you are getting maintenance
that is not child maintenance, this will continue to be means-tested. For
example, any spousal maintenance you get will be means tested.

Half of your assessable maintenance is disregarded (not taken into account) in
the means test for the following payments:

  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) (JA) 
  * [ Jobseeker’s Transitional payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/) (JST) 
  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) (DA) 
  * [ Blind Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/) (BP) 
  * [ Farm Assist ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) (FA) 
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) (OFP) 
  * [ Guardian’s Payment (Non-Contributory) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/)
  * [ Working Family Payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/working-family-payment/) (WFP) 

####  **Rent or mortgage costs**

If you have housing costs, your rent or mortgage repayment up to a maximum of
€95.23 per week can be offset against maintenance payments. Half the balance
is then assessed as means. You must show proof of rent or mortgage payments.

If you do not have any housing costs, half of your means from maintenance is
assessed.

####  Example of how maintenance is assessed

**Example of how maintenance is assessed in a calculation of means**  
---  
A single parent with one child is getting maintenance of €300. The
_maintenance order_ specifies €100 for the parent and €200 for the child (the
€200 for the child is not included in the means test). Rent is €150 per week
(€95.23 of which is offset against maintenance payments).  Maintenance:
€300.00  
Minus child maintenance: €200  Minus rent: €95.23  
Total: €4.77  
(Only half assessed as means)  
**Total means from maintenance: €2.38**  
  
###  **Getting a payment before 2003**

If you were getting one of the payments listed above (except Working Family
Payment) before 2003, you may qualify to have your maintenance assessed using
the old rules.

See more detailed information about these rules and the [ assessment of
maintenance as means ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/11f23e-means-
assessment-guidelines/#assessment-of-maintenance) on gov.ie.

##  How maintenance is assessed for Rent Supplement

In the means test for [ Rent Supplement
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) , maintenance is
assessed as additional household income, and maintenance payments up to €95.23
per week are assessed in full. The ‘household income disregard’ applies to
maintenance payments above this amount.

###  **Household income disregard**

A certain amount of your household income above the Supplementary Welfare
Allowance (SWA) rate for your situation is not taken into account.

€75 of any additional household income is not taken into account and 25% of
additional household income over €75 is not taken into account. There is no
upper limit on the amount that can be disregarded.

You can [ read more about calculating Rent Supplement.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/calculating-rent-supplement/)

##  How maintenance is assessed for Working Family Payment

Only one [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) (WFP) can be made for any family.

This means that if you are applying for WFP, the parent from whom you are
getting maintenance must not be getting WFP.

You cannot offset your housing costs against maintenance payments for WFP, if
you have already done so in the means test for another social welfare payment.

##  How maintenance is assessed for a child with a means-tested social
assistance payment

###  **Jobseeker’s Allowance**

Since 4 June 2024, child maintenance payments are excluded from the means test
for all social welfare payments.

Previously, if you were getting Jobseeker's Allowance, any maintenance paid to
your parent on your behalf was assessed as [ benefit and privilege
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/626ffc-operational-guidelines-jobseekers-
allowance-benefit-and-privilege-me/) against you. If a portion of the
maintenance was paid directly to you, this portion was assessed as cash income
against you, and the remainder (which was paid to your parent) was assessed as
benefit and privilege.

###  **Disability Allowance**

Previously, if you were getting Disability Allowance, any maintenance in the
form of cash income from either parent was assessable as means. However, child
maintenance is now disregarded in the means test.

_**Page edited:** 6 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Maintenance%20and%20social%20welfare%20payments&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Maintenance%20and%20social%20welfare%20payments&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-
payments/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2540.274

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

2518.5366

  * [ _Maintenance payments and tax_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/maintenance-and-tax/)

The taxation of maintenance payments to a former partner depends on the type
of maintenance payment.

2484.8079

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

