**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Disability and illness payments ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/)
> Invalidity Pension

#  Invalidity Pension

  * What is Invalidity Pension? 
  * How to qualify for Invalidity Pension 
  * Rate of Invalidity Pension 
  * How to apply for Invalidity Pension 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is Invalidity Pension?

Invalidity Pension is a weekly payment to people who cannot work because of a
long-term illness or disability and who are covered by [ social insurance
(PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/social-insurance/) .

At 66, you transfer automatically to [ the State Pension (Contributory)
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) at
the full rate.

Invalidity Pension is [ taxable ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)
.

You can get the [ Free Travel scheme ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-
welfare-benefits/free-travel/) with Invalidity Pension. You may also get [
extra social welfare benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/) such as the [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/) .

##  How to qualify for Invalidity Pension

To qualify for Invalidity Pension you must meet both:

  * Social Insurance (PRSI) rules – see below 
  * Medical rules – see below 

###  Social insurance (PRSI) rules

Only PRSI contributions at Class A, E, H and S count for an Invalidity
Pension. Most employees are covered by Class A.

You must also have a certain number of PRSI contributions to get an Invalidity
Pension.

To get Invalidity Pension you must have at least:

  * 260 (5 years) paid PRSI contributions 
  * 48 weeks of paid or credited PRSI contributions in the last or second last completed year before the **start date of your permanent incapacity for work.** The start date is decided by the Department of Social Protection (DSP). It is usually after you have been unable to work for one year. But it can be less than one year if you are permanently incapable of work for life. 

If you need your social insurance contributions paid in another EU/EEA member
state to help you qualify, then your last contribution must have been in
Ireland. Read more about [ combining social insurance contributions from
abroad ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-
welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) .

You cannot use voluntary contributions to meet the PRSI rules.

###  Medical rules

To get Invalidity Pension you must meet the PRSI rules and be unable to work
because of an illness or disability.

To meet the medical rules, you must:

  * Have been incapable of work for at least 12 months and be likely to be incapable of work for at least another 12 months (you may have been getting Illness Benefit or Disability Allowance during that time) 

**Or**

  * Be permanently incapable of work (in certain cases of very serious illness or disability, you can transfer directly from another social welfare payment or from your job to Invalidity Pension). 

A Deciding Officer in the DSP will decide if you meet the medical and PRSI
rules for Invalidity Pension.

###  Invalidity Pension and work

You cannot do paid work and get Invalidity Pension.

If you want to return to work or self-employment, you may be able to transfer
to [ Partial Capacity Benefit (PCB)
](/en/social_welfare/social_welfare_payments/disability_and_illness/partial_capacity_benefit.html)
. You will qualify for Partial Capacity Benefit if the restriction on your
capacity for work is assessed as moderate, severe, or profound.

###  Education and training

If you want to do an education or [ training course ](/en/education/further-
education-and-training/training-courses/) and keep your Invalidity Pension,
you must contact the Invalidity Pension section and get written permission
before you start.

##  Rate of Invalidity Pension

**Weekly** **Invalidity Pension rate 2024**

**Maximum personal rate** |  **Increase for an adult dependant** |  **Increase for a child dependant**  
---|---|---  
€237.50  |  €169.70  |  Child under 12 years of age  €46 (full rate), €23 (half-rate)  Child aged 12 and over  €54 (full rate), €27 (half-rate)   
  
You may get an increase in your payment for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-
dependant/) , but it will depend on their income.

You may get an increase in your payment for a [ child dependant ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) . You
will not get an increase in your payment for child dependant if your spouse,
civil partner or cohabitant has an income of over €400 a week. You will get a
half-rate increase for a child if your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant
earns between €310 and €400 a week. This only applies to claims made after 5
July 2012.

###  Tax and Invalidity Pension

Invalidity Pension is a [ taxable source of income. ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/) The DSP informs [ Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact/lo-call.html) that you are getting
Invalidity Pension and the amount paid to you.

###  **Social insurance contributions from abroad and Invalidity Pension**

You may have lived and worked in another country at some stage in your life.
Ireland has social security arrangements with other countries that allow you
to combine social insurance contributions that you have paid in Ireland with
social insurance contributions that you have paid in another country.

Find out [ how social insurance contributions from abroad are calculated for
Invalidity Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-
insurance-contributions-from-abroad/#f925f9) .

##  How to apply for Invalidity Pension

To apply for Invalidity Pension, fill in an [ Invalidity Pension application
form (INV1) (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/26960/3c5fe0e0216f42e09abd80b9cd2402d8.pdf) . You can
get a form from your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

You can apply for [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) while you
are waiting for your Invalidity Pension claim to be processed. SWA is a means
tested payment. In a means test the Department of Social Protection examines
all your sources of income. To get SWA, your income must be below a certain
amount.

###  Moving from Illness Benefit to Invalidity Pension

If you have been getting Illness Benefit for 468 days, the DSP will medically
assess you to find out if you still qualify for Illness Benefit and if you may
meet the medical criteria for Invalidity Pension. Following this assessment,
you may be sent an IP application form (INV2).

This does not stop you from applying for Invalidity Pension in the normal way
using application form (INV1).

You can get help to fill in your form from your [ local Citizens Information
Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) , Intreo Centre or Social
Welfare Branch Office.

###  Appeals

If you think you have been wrongly refused Invalidity Pension or you are
unhappy about a decision of a Deciding Officer, you can [ appeal this decision
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/) .  

##  Where to apply

###  Invalidity Pension Section

Social Welfare Services Office  
Government Buildings  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
N39 E4E0  
Ireland

**Tel:** (043) 334 0000 or 0818 927 770

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d148b9-invalidity-pension/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/d148b9-invalidity-pension/)

**Email:** [ Invgenenq@welfare.ie ](mailto:Invgenenq@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 23 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Invalidity%20Pension&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Invalidity%20Pension&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Benefits for people who are sick or have a disability_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/benefits-to-people-who-are-sick-or-have-a-disability/)

An overview of benefits available to people who are sick or have a disability

1006.1941

  * [ _Checklist for people with disabilities and long-term illness_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/checklist-disability/)

Quick reference guide to services and entitlements for people with
disabilities or long-term illnesses and their families and carers

961.2018

  * [ _Tax relief on pensions_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/tax-relief-on-pensions/)

You can get income tax relief on your pension contributions. You can also get
tax relief on a lump sum pension payment when you retire.

911.6046

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

