**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Families and children ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/) > Adoptive
Benefit

#  Adoptive Benefit

  * What is Adoptive Benefit? 
  * How to qualify for Adoptive Benefit 
  * How long is Adoptive Benefit paid? 
  * Rate of Adoptive Benefit 
  * Half-rate Adoptive Benefit with another social welfare payment 
  * How to apply for Adoptive Benefit 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is Adoptive Benefit?

Adoptive Benefit is a payment made to a parent who is on [ adoptive leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/maternity-leave/) from work and covered by [ social insurance (PRSI)
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-
insurance/) .

Adoptive Benefit is paid for 24 weeks from the date you adopted your child.

To get the full 24 weeks of Adoptive Benefit, your adoptive leave must begin
on the date of adoption.

If a couple are adopting a child, only one parent can apply for Adoptive
Benefit. The parent not getting Adoptive Benefit can apply for [ paternity
leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/paternity-leave/) and [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/) .

You should apply for Adoptive Benefit 6 weeks before you plan to go on [
adoptive leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-
holidays/adoptive-leave/) (12 weeks if you are self-employed).

If you think you have been wrongly refused Adoptive Benefit, you can [ appeal
this decision ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
appeals/) .

##  How to qualify for Adoptive Benefit

To get Adoptive Benefit, you must:

  * Have enough PRSI (social insurance) contributions 
  * Have certified adoptive leave from work if you are an employee – see ‘How to apply’ below 
  * Provide a Certificate of Placement (for [ domestic adoption ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/domestic-adoption/) ) or Declaration of Suitability (for [ intercountry adoption ](/en/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-fostering/intercountry-adoption/) ) – see ‘How to apply’ below 

###  PRSI (social insurance) contributions

Adoptive Benefit is paid to a parent who has a certain number of paid PRSI
contributions and who is in insurable employment up to the first day of their
adoptive leave.

If a couple are adopting a child, only one parent can apply for Adoptive
Benefit and adoptive leave. Only the social insurance (PRSI) contributions of
the parent applying for Adoptive Benefit are used.

Your PRSI contributions can be from employment or self-employment. The PRSI
classes that count for Adoptive Benefit are A, E, H and S

Members of the Defence Forces who pay PRSI at Class H are insured for Adoptive
Benefit, but it is not paid while they are in service.

Time spent on the [ COVID-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment (PUP) ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-payment/) and the [
COVID-19 Employment Wage Subsidy Scheme (EWSS) ](/en/employment/unemployment-
and-redundancy/employment-wage-subsidy-scheme/) are treated as if you
continued to make insurance contributions at your normal social insurance
class.

**Number of PRSI contributions you need**

If you are employed, to qualify for Adoptive Benefit you must be in insurable
employment immediately before the first day of your adoptive leave and have at
least:

  * 39 weeks PRSI paid in the 12-month period before the adoption date of your child 

Or

  * 39 weeks PRSI paid since first starting work and at least 39 weeks PRSI paid or credited in the relevant tax year or in the year after the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022 and the tax year after the relevant tax year is 2023. 

Or

  * 26 weeks PRSI paid in the relevant tax year and at least 26 weeks PRSI paid in the tax year before the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the relevant tax year is 2022 and the tax year before the relevant tax year is 2021. 

If you do not meet these PRSI conditions and you were self-employed before
starting work as an employee, you might meet the contribution conditions for
the self-employed in the relevant tax year – see below.

**If you are self-employed** , you must have:

  * 52 PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the relevant tax year 

Or

  * 52 PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the tax year before the relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the tax year before the relevant tax year is 2021. 

Or

  * 52 qualifying PRSI contributions paid at Class S in the tax year after relevant tax year. For example, if you are going on adoptive leave in 2024, the tax year after the relevant tax year is 2023. 

If you do not meet these PRSI conditions and you were in insurable employment
before becoming self-employed, you might meet the contribution conditions for
employees in the relevant tax year – see PRSI conditions for employees above.

PRSI Class S contributions for a particular year are not awarded until you
have paid tax due for that year. To qualify for Adoptive Benefit, your income
tax and PRSI liabilities (importantly for the relevant tax year) must be paid.

**If you worked in another country**

If you were employed in the UK or a country covered by EU Regulations and you
have paid at least one full-rate PRSI contribution in Ireland, you can [
combine your insurance record in that country with your Irish PRSI
contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-
social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) to help
you qualify for Adoptive Benefit. To do this, you must be in insurable
employment in Ireland currently and have paid your most recent PRSI
contribution in Ireland.

##  How long is Adoptive Benefit paid?

Adoptive Benefit is paid for 24 weeks from the date you adopted your child. To
get the full 24 weeks of Adoptive Benefit, your adoptive leave must begin on
the date of adoption.

You can take a further 16 weeks of unpaid [ adoptive leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-
leave/) immediately after your 24 weeks’ paid Adoptive Benefit. This period is
not covered by Adoptive Benefit but you can get a [ credited social insurance
contribution ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) for each week of
unpaid leave you take (up to the maximum of 16).

##  Rate of Adoptive Benefit

**Weekly** **Adoptive Benefit rate 2024**

**Adoptive Benefit** |  **Weekly rate**  
---|---  
Standard payment  |  €274   
  
###  Extra payment for partner and child

If you have an adult or child dependants, the standard rate of Adoptive
Benefit is compared to the rate of Illness Benefit that would be paid to you
if you were absent from work through illness. The higher of the two rates is
paid to you.

###  Taxation of Adoptive Benefit

Adoptive Benefit is taxed. You can get more information from Revenue on [
taxation of Adoptive Benefit ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-
pensions/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/maternity-adoptive-health-safety-
benefits.aspx) .

###  How Adoptive Benefit is paid

Adoptive Benefit is paid directly into your bank account. It is paid each week
in advance.

If your employer is paying you while you are on adoptive leave from work, you
can have it paid directly into your employer's bank account.

###  Payment abroad

**EU, EEA and Switzerland:** If you are a citizen of the EU/EEA or
Switzerland, you can get Adoptive Benefit for any period of your adoptive
leave spent in another EU/EEA country or Switzerland. You can travel anywhere
abroad (outside the EU/EEA and Switzerland) and get Adoptive Benefit for a
maximum of 6 weeks.

**Non-EU/EEA/Swiss citizens** : Citizens of countries other than the EU/EEA or
Switzerland can travel anywhere outside Ireland and get Adoptive Benefit for a
maximum of 6 weeks.

To get your Adoptive Benefit paid while abroad, you must notify the Department
before you travel.

##  Half-rate Adoptive Benefit with another social welfare payment

Half-rate Adoptive Benefit can be paid, if you qualify for Adoptive Benefit
and you are getting any one of the following payments:

  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory Pension) ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory Pension) ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * Deserted Wife's Benefit 
  * Prisoner's Wife's Allowance 
  * A Widow's Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Pension under the Death Benefit [ Occupational Injuries scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)

If you are providing full-time care to another person, you may get [ half-rate
Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/)
with your full-rate Adoptive Benefit.

[ Working Family Payment (WFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) and full-rate Adoptive Benefit and can be
paid at the same time.

##  How to apply for Adoptive Benefit

To apply fill in [ Form AB1 for Adoptive Benefit (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/19885/4752adede6b54df79be3d1d472c7a5bf.pdf) .

If you are an employee, your employer must fill in Part 4 of the form. You
must give your employer a Certificate of Placement (for domestic adoptions) or
[ Declaration of Suitability
](https://aai.gov.ie/en/component/content/article/138-declarations-of-
eligibility-and-suitability-new-
rules.html?catid=20&highlight=WyJkZWNsYXJhdGlvbiIsIm9mIiwic3VpdGFiaWxpdHkiXQ==&Itemid=429)
(for intercountry adoptions) confirming the adoption. You must do this within
4 weeks of the date that the child comes into your care.

If you are an employee or self-employed, you must also give a [ Certificate of
Placement ](https://www.tusla.ie/services/alternative-care/adoption-
services/adoption/adoption-offices/) (for domestic adoptions) or Declaration
of Suitability (for intercountry adoptions) to the Adoptive Benefit section in
the DSP.

You will not be paid Adoptive Benefit until the DSP gets either a Certificate
of Placement or Declaration of Suitability.

You can find out more about the [ documentation you need for Adoptive Benefit
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/ba2c24-operational-guidelines-adoptive-
benefit/#documentation) .

##  Where to apply

###  Adoptive Benefit Section

Department of Social Protection  
McCarter's Road  
Buncrana  
Donegal  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898

**Locall:** 0818 690 690 (Note: the rates charged for using 0818 (Lo-call)
numbers may vary)

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/295b84-adoptive-benefit/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/295b84-adoptive-benefit/)

_**Page edited:** 2 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Adoptive%20Benefit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Adoptive%20Benefit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Adoptive leave_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/leave-and-holidays/adoptive-leave/)

Adoptive leave gives one parent who adopts a child, 24 weeks’ leave from work
after the child is placed in your care.

1577.6117

  * [ _Benefits and entitlements relating to birth and children_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/benefits-and-entitlements-relating-to-birth/)

There is a range of benefits and entitlements to support women who are having
a baby. This document gives a general overview of these supports.

1253.5413

  * [ _Taxation of benefits from employment_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-benefits-from-employment/)

Employees can get certain benefits in addition to their salary or wages. Most
of these benefits are taxed.

1218.4537

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

