**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Families and children ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/) > Health
and Safety Benefit

#  Health and Safety Benefit

  * What is Health and Safety Benefit? 
  * How to qualify 
  * How long is Health and Safety Benefit paid? 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Health and Safety Benefit and tax 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is Health and Safety Benefit?

Health and Safety Benefit is a weekly payment for employed women who are
pregnant or breastfeeding, and who are granted [ health and safety leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-
safety-work#l4ac79) by their employer.

You are granted health and safety leave from employment if your employer
cannot remove a risk to your health while you are pregnant, or breastfeeding,
or assign you alternative "risk-free" duties. The right to [ health and safety
leave ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-
safety/health-safety-work/) from employment is set out under [ Section 18 of
the Maternity Protection Act 1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1994/act/34/section/18/enacted/en/html) .

To qualify for Health and Safety Benefit, you must meet certain criteria and
social insurance (PRSI) contribution conditions. Your employer pays your
normal wage for the first 21 days (3 weeks) of your health and safety leave
and the Department of Social Protection pays Health and Safety Benefit for the
remainder.

If you think you have been wrongly refused Health and Safety Benefit you can [
appeal this decision ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
welfare-appeals/) .

During health and safety leave from employment, you are still considered to be
in employment (this means, for example, that you continue to accumulate annual
leave entitlement). However you are not entitled to payment for public
holidays that occur while you are on health and safety leave.

##  How to qualify

To get Health and Safety Benefit you must:

  1. Be pregnant or have recently given birth 
  2. Be awarded health and safety leave from your employer 
  3. Satisfy PRSI conditions 

###  Pregnant or recently given birth

If you are pregnant you can qualify for Health and Safety Benefit if you are:

  * Exposed to _certain risks_ in the workplace or 
  * A night worker 

If you are breastfeeding, you can qualify if you are exposed to certain risks
in the workplace. This only applies when you are breastfeeding in the first 26
weeks after the birth.

If you have given birth in the last 14 weeks, you can qualify if you are a
night worker.

A **night worker** works for at least 3 hours of their normal shift between
11pm and 6am, or at least 25% of their monthly hours are between 11pm and 6am.

You can read [ detailed guidance
](https://www.hsa.ie/eng/Publications_and_Forms/Publications/Retail/Gen_Apps_Pregnant_Post_Natal.pdf)
on what **certain risks** means from the Health and Safety Authority.

###  Be awarded health and safety leave

You must apply to your employer for [ health and safety leave
](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-
safety-work#l4ac79) .

###  PRSI conditions

Both you and your employer [ pay PRSI ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-insurance/) when you are
working. PRSI is [ credited ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) in some
circumstances when you are not working.

For Health and Safety Benefit you must meet one of the following PRSI
conditions:

  * You have least 13 weeks of social insurance (PRSI) paid in the 12 months immediately before the date your baby is due or 
  * You have 104 weeks' PRSI paid since you first started work and 39 weeks' PRSI paid or credited in the relevant tax year or in the year following the relevant tax year (of which at least 13 must be paid contributions) or 
  * You have 104 weeks' PRSI paid since you first started work and 26 weeks' PRSI paid in the relevant tax year and 26 weeks' PRSI paid in the tax year before the relevant tax year 

The _relevant tax year_ is the second-last complete tax year before you claim
Health and Safety Benefit. For example, for claims made in 2024 the relevant
tax year is 2022.

##  How long is Health and Safety Benefit paid?

Health and Safety Benefit lasts until:

  * The day you become entitled to Maternity Benefit, if you are pregnant 
  * 14 weeks from the date on which you gave birth, if you are an employee who has recently given birth and do night work 
  * 26 weeks from the date on which you gave birth, if you are breastfeeding 

You are disqualified from getting Health and Safety Benefit if:

  * You are getting [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)
  * You are no longer at risk in the workplace 
  * Your employer has removed the risk or given you other work 
  * You are employed on a fixed-term contract and that contract expires 
  * You return to work or start other work 
  * You go to prison 

##  Rates

**Weekly** **Health and Safety Benefit rate 2024**

**Earnings per week** |  **Personal rate** |  **Qualified adult rate**  
---|---|---  
Less than €150  |  €104.10  |  €99.70   
€150 - €219.99  |  €149.60  |  €99.70   
€220 - €299.99  |  €181.70  |  €99.70   
€300 or more  |  €232  |  €154   
  
Half-rate Health and Safety Benefit can be paid if you are getting [ certain
social welfare payments ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-two-social-welfare-
payments/) .

###  Payment of Health and Safety Benefit

You will be paid directly into your bank account, or by weekly cheque. You get
a personal rate and may get an increase for an [ adult dependant ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-
dependant/) and [ child dependant ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/) . Your average weekly earnings do **not**
affect the rate of payment for a child dependant.

Under the Maternity Protection Act 1994, a woman who qualifies for Health and
Safety Benefit is entitled to claim [ Working Family Payment (WFP)
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-family-payment/) .

##  How to apply

To get this benefit you must fill in a [ Health and Safety Benefit application
form (pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/21783/a8cbe2cf88f544568b78dcb9a1c85bb1.pdf)
and send it to the Health and Safety Benefit Section (see 'Where to apply'
below).

You must complete parts 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7.

Your employer must fill in, sign and stamp part 4.

Your GP must fill in, sign and stamp part 8.

##  Health and Safety Benefit and tax

Health and Safety Benefit is taxable for all claimants. It is taxed in the
same way as Maternity Benefit. Universal Social Charge and PRSI are not
payable. You can read about how [ Maternity Benefit is taxed ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/) .

You can also get more information from Revenue on [ taxation of Maternity
Benefit ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/taxation-of-social-
welfare-payments/maternity-adoptive-health-safety-benefits.aspx) .

##  Where to apply

###  Health and Safety Benefit Section

McCarter's Road  
Ardaravan  
Buncrana  
Donegal  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 or 0818 690 690

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/1c9f42-health-and-safety-
benefit/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/1c9f42-health-and-safety-benefit/)

_**Page edited:** 2 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Health%20and%20Safety%20Benefit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Health%20and%20Safety%20Benefit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-
benefit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Food safety and environmental health services_ ](/en/health/food-safety/food-safety-and-environmental-health-services/)

A brief description of the different agencies involved in food safety and
environmental health in Ireland and Europe.

1579.564

  * [ _Health and safety at work_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/health-and-safety/health-safety-work/)

Employers' responsibilities to employees regarding health and safety measures
in the workplace.

1501.8402

  * [ _Safety orders, protection orders and barring orders in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders/)

Irish law provides protection for those living in violent or abusive
situations in the home. What are safety orders, protection orders and barring
orders and who can apply.

1042.4281

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

