**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for older and retired people ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/) > State Pension (Non-Contributory)

#  State Pension (Non-Contributory)

  * What is the State Pension (Non-Contributory)? 
  * How to qualify for a State Pension (Non-Contributory) 
  * Means test for a State Pension (Non-Contributory) 
  * How much is State Pension (Non-Contributory)? 
  * How to apply for a State Pension (Non-Contributory) 
  * Extra Benefits 
  * If the claimant dies 
  * More information 

##  What is the State Pension (Non-Contributory)?

The State Pension (Non-Contributory) is a payment for people aged 66 and over
who do not qualify for a [ State Pension (Contributory) (SPC)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-contributory/) .

If you get a reduced rate of SPC, you should check if you would be better off
getting a State Pension (Non-Contributory).

The [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) is taxable
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)
, but if it is your only income you are unlikely to pay tax on it.

##  How to qualify for a State Pension (Non-Contributory)

To get a State Pension (Non-Contributory), you must:

  * Be aged 66 or over 
  * Have a [ PPS number ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/)
  * Pass a means test, in which the Department of Social Protection looks at any income you have (see ‘Means test’ below) 
  * Live in Ireland and meet the [ habitual residence condition (HRC) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-residence-condition/)

##  Means test for a State Pension (Non-Contributory)

The State Pension (Non-Contributory) is a means-tested payment.

In a means test, the Department of Social Protection (DSP) looks at all your
sources of income. They also look at your spouse, civil partner, or
cohabitant’s income.

To get a State Pension (Non-Contributory), your combined weekly income must be
below a certain amount.

The main items included in the means test are cash income and capital.

###  **Cash income**

The DSP looks at any cash income that you and your spouse, civil partner, or
cohabitant may have. For example, pensions from another country or income from
employment.

You can earn up to €200 per week from employment, and it won’t affect your
pension. However, this does not include self-employment or farming. Your
spouse, civil partner or cohabitant can also earn up to €200 per week. If
either of you have income from employment above this amount, it is assessed in
the means test.

Read about other [ cash income **not included** in the means test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-
social-welfare-means-test/) .

####  **Farming or leasing your land**

If you are farming or leasing your land, your net income is assessed in the
means test.

Your net income is worked out by taking your gross income (your income before
tax), and deducting your expenses.

If you own land that is not productively used or leased, the DSP assesses it
on its _capital value_ instead (see ‘Capital’ below).

See more information about [ how income from farming is assessed
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/66ac9a-operational-guidelines-state-
pension-non-contributory/) on Gov.ie.

####  **Maintenance payments**

The DSP looks at maintenance paid to you (for example, spousal maintenance).

From 7 June 2024, child maintenance payments are not assessed in the means
test for State Pension (Non-Contributory).

If you show proof of rent or mortgage costs, the DSP will _disregard_ (not
take into account) up to €95.23 per week of your maintenance payments.

Only half of your remaining assessable maintenance is taken into account.

Read more about [ how maintenance is assessed as means
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/maintenance-and-social-welfare-
payments/) .

###  **Capital**

Capital includes your savings, investments, shares, and any property you have
(but not your own home).

####  **How capital is assessed for State Pension (Non-Contributory)**

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) adds all your capital from different
sources together, and then uses the following formula to [ find your weekly
means from capital: ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-
payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/)

**Your capital** |  **Weekly means assessed**  
---|---  
First €20,000  |  Nil   
Next €10,000  |  €1 per €1,000   
Next €10,000  |  €2 per €1,000   
Balance  |  €4 per €1,000   
  
If your property is assessed on its capital value, then income from that
property (such as rent) is not assessed in the means test.

If you or your spouse, civil partner, or cohabitant saves a portion of your
State Pension (Non-Contributory) each week, these savings will be assessed as
capital.

###  **Income from your home (such as rent)**

The value of the house you live in is not taken into account in the means
test.

However, if you get income from your home (for example, from renting a room),
this may be taken into account. There are some exceptions:

  * Your income from rent is not taken into account if you would otherwise be living alone 
  * You can get up to [ €269.23 a week (€14,000 per year) from renting a room in your home ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) without it affecting your State (Non-Contributory) Pension. The person renting a room in your home must use the room for at least 28 consecutive days, and they cannot be your employee or an immediate family member. 

You should check if [ renting a room in your home will affect your Fuel
Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/extra-social-
welfare-benefits/fuel-
allowance/#b05c78:~:text=is%20not%20rented.-,Renting%20a%20room%20in%20your%20home,-If%20you%20are)
.

The [ Accommodation Recognition Payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/ukrainian-refugees-in-
ireland/accommodation-recognition-payment/) for hosting refugees from Ukraine
is not assessed in the means test for the State (Non-Contributory) Pension.

####  **Selling your home**

If you sell your home, the proceeds of the sale are normally taken into
account in the means test.

However, if you live in accommodation which no longer suits you, or which you
are no longer able to maintain, you may choose to sell your home and move to
more suitable accommodation. In this case, up to €190,500 of the sale proceeds
is exempt from the means test.

You must be selling your house to:

  * Buy or rent more suitable alternative accommodation 
  * Move into a registered nursing home or sheltered housing 
  * Move in with a person who is getting a carer’s payment for you 

If you use the proceeds of the sale to buy more suitable accommodation, the
balance of the proceeds **after** buying the new accommodation is exempt up to
a limit of €190,500.

Read our information about:

  * [ How investing the proceeds from the sale of your house is assessable as means ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/#fc4c38:~:text=Investment%20income%20from%20the%20sale%20of%20your%20home)
  * [ Leaving your home but not selling it ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/#fc4c38:~:text=Leaving%20your%20home%20but%20not%20selling)

###  **Your total means**

The DSP adds your cash income and capital together to get your ‘total means’.
This determines what rate of pension you will get, if any.

####  **If you’re in a couple**

If you are one half of a couple (married, civil partners or cohabiting), then
your means are taken to be half of the total combined means of yourself and
your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant.

Read more about [ how a couple’s means are assessed for social assistance
payments ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/assessing-the-means-of-
a-couple/) .

####  **Getting a social welfare payment before State Pension (Non-
Contributory)**

If you were getting one of the following payments immediately before the State
Pension Non-Contributory, and your rate of payment was higher than the rate of
State Pension Non-Contributory you would get, then you will continue getting
the higher rate:

  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
  * [ One Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Non-Contributory Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Deserted Wife's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/deserted-wifes-allowance/)

##  How much is State Pension (Non-Contributory)?

**Weekly** **State Pension (Non-Contributory) rate 2024**

**Your age** |  **Personal rate (maximum)** |  **Increase for an adult dependant under 66** |  **Increase for a child dependant**  
---|---|---|---  
66 and under 80  |  €266  |  €175.70  |  Child under 12: €46 (full rate), €23 (half rate)  Child aged 12 and over: €54 (full rate), €27 (half rate)   
80 and over  |  €276   
  
Your first €30 per week of means does not affect your rate of State Pension
(Non-Contributory). But after €30, your pension is reduced by €2.50 for every
€2.50 of means.

You can check your rate of State Pension (Non-Contributory) based on your
means using [ the SW19 (Rates of Payment) booklet
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/1af6ca-rates-of-payment-sw19/) .

###  **Increase for an adult dependant**

If you get an [ increase in your State Pension (Non-Contributory) for an adult
dependent ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-
social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) , this increase will be paid
directly to your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant. **This only applies if
you claimed for an adult dependant after 27 September 2007** .

When your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant reaches 66, you’ll no longer get
an increase in your payment for them. However, they can apply for a State
Pension (Non-Contributory) in their own right.

###  **When will I get my payment?**

The State Pension (Non-Contributory) is paid every Friday.

You can choose to either:

  * Be paid directly into your bank account 
  * Collect it from your local post office using your [ Public Services Card ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/)

##  How to apply for a State Pension (Non-Contributory)

You should apply for the State Pension (Non-Contributory) 3 months before your
66th birthday.

###  **Application form**

You can download and print the [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) application
form (SPNC1) (pdf) ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/pdf/spnc1.pdf) .

Or, you can get the form from:

  * Your [ local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e21eee-state-pension-non-contributory/)
  * Your [ local post office ](https://www.anpost.com/Store-Locator)
  * Your [ local Citizens Information Centre (CIC) ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) . You can also ask your local CIC for help filling in the form. 

Send your completed application form to the address at the bottom of this
page.

###  **Appeal a decision**

If you are not happy with the decision on your application for a State Pension
(Non-Contributory), you can appeal it to the [ Social Welfare Appeals Office
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/) .

###  **If your circumstances change**

You must tell the Department of Social Protection if there are any [ changes
to your circumstances ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-
that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/) .

##  Extra Benefits

If you get a State Pension (Non-Contributory), you may also be entitled to:

  * [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance Schemes ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/)
  * [ Rent Supplement ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) to help with the cost of your rent 
  * [ Living Alone Increase ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/) if you live alone 
  * [ Household Benefits Package ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-package/) to help with the cost of electricity or gas, and a free TV licence 
  * [ Free Travel Pass ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) to use public transport for free 
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/) to help with the cost of heating your home during winter 
  * [ Island Increase ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-increase/) if you live on [ specified islands ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/66ac9a-operational-guidelines-state-pension-non-contributory/#increase-for-living-on-a-specified-island) off the coast of Ireland 
  * [ Centenarian's Payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/centenarians-bounty/) when you reach 100 years of age 
  * [ Carer's Support Grant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-support-grant/) , which is an annual payment for carers who provide full-time care for at least 6 months a year. 

##  If the claimant dies

If someone getting a State Pension (Non-Contributory) dies, you should:

  * Tell the State Pension (Non-Contributory) section of the Department of Social Protection as soon as possible (see contact details at the end of this page) 
  * Return the person’s [ Public Services Card ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/) (the card they use to collect their payment at the Post Office). You should note their PPS number and card number for your reference 

In many cases, the spouse, civil partner, cohabitant or carer will get a [
payment for 6 weeks following the person’s death
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/death-related-
benefits/social-welfare-payments-following-a-death/) .

###  **If your adult dependant or child dependant dies**

If your State Pension (Non-Contributory) includes an [ increase for your adult
dependant ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-
social-welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) or [ child dependant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/) , and your dependant dies, you must tell the
State Pension (Non-Contributory) section of the Department of Social
Protection as soon as possible (see contact details below).

You will continue getting an increase in your payment for 6 weeks after their
death.

##  More information

You can read about the [ State Pension (Non-Contributory)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e21eee-state-pension-non-
contributory/?referrer=https://www.gov.ie/SPNC/) on Gov.ie.

The Department of Social Protection has also published [ detailed information
about the non-contributory pension
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/66ac9a-operational-guidelines-state-
pension-non-contributory/) .

Send your completed [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) application form
(SPNC1) (pdf) ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/pdf/spnc1.pdf) to:

###  State Pension (Non-contributory)

Department of Social Protection

Social Welfare Services  
College Road  
Sligo  
F91 T384

**Opening Hours:** This office does not offer a service to personal callers.
All queries must be made by telephone or in writing.

**Tel:** (071) 915 7100 or 0818 200 400

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e21eee-state-pension-non-
contributory/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e21eee-state-pension-non-
contributory/)

**Email:** [ State.NonCon@welfare.ie ](mailto:State.NonCon@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 3 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=State%20Pension%20%28Non-
Contributory%29&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=State%20Pension%20%28Non-
Contributory%29&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-
contributory/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Worksheet: State Pension (Non-Contributory) and income from work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/worksheet-state-pension-non-contributory-and-income-from-work/)

Use this worksheet to find out how your earnings from employment will affect
your State Pension (Non-Contributory).

3698.4553

  * [ _Case study: Working and claiming a State Pension (Non-Contributory)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-working-and-claiming-a-state-pension-non-contributory/)

This case study examines how the earnings from employment will affect your
State Pension (Non-Contributory).

3432.6875

  * [ _Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Non-Contributory) Pension_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)

The Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s Non-Contributory Pension
is payable to widowed people or surviving civil partners without dependent
children who do not qualify for a contributory pension and who pass a means
test.

2827.1724

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

