**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/) > Changes that can affect
your social welfare payment

#  Changes that can affect your social welfare payment

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you are getting a social welfare payment and your personal circumstances
change you **must** contact the Department of Social Protection. A change in
your circumstances can mean you get an increase or a decrease in your social
welfare payment. You could even be entitled to an extra or different social
welfare payment.

Contacting the Department will mean you get your increase faster or avoid
repaying overpayments.

A change in your personal circumstances may mean you qualify for a social
welfare payment for the first time. For example, if you were working and
recently lost your job, you may be entitled to [ Jobseeker's Benefit
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's
Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) . If
you are in private rented accommodation you may also qualify for [ Rent
Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) . [ Read more about losing your job
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/losing-your-job/) .

Sometimes, there can be a change in your personal circumstances but you don't
qualify for a social welfare payment. In this case, you may qualify for
Supplementary Welfare Allowance. For example, if your employer does not pay
you when you are out of work sick, but you don't qualify for Illness Benefit,
you may qualify for [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) .

You can also read more about [ Rent Supplement and changes to your
circumstances ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) .

##  Rules

###  Changes meaning you qualify for additional social welfare payments

A change in your personal circumstances may mean you qualify for an additional
social welfare payment. For example, if you are getting a One-Parent Family
Payment and get a job for at least 19 hours a week, you may be able to claim [
Working Family Payment (WFP) ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) .

###  Changes meaning you qualify for a different social welfare payment

A change in your circumstances may mean you no longer qualify for the payment
you are currently getting but qualify for a different payment. In some cases,
you may be financially better off on the different payment. For example,
Domiciliary Care Allowance is no longer paid when the person being cared for
reaches 16 years of age. However, the person with the disability can apply for
[ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/) , which is paid at a higher rate than [ Domiciliary Care Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-allowance/) .

###  Changes meaning you qualify for extra payments

Some extra payments, such as the [ Fuel Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/extra-
social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/) , the [ Living Alone Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/living-alone-allowance/) or
the [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/household-benefits-package/) as it applies to people under age 70,
require you to either live alone or with certain qualified people. If you do
not qualify because of this rule and your circumstances change, you should
contact the Department of Social Protection.

You may also lose the payment if an 'unqualified' person comes to live with
you.

###  Changes meaning you qualify for a reduced social welfare payment

If you or your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant take up employment or get
income or capital from any other source, it may reduce your payment.

If you or your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant save a portion of your
State Pension (Non-Contributory) each week, these savings will be taken into
account as means. It is important to notify the Department of Social
Protection of these savings to avoid [ an overpayment ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-
welfare-overpayments/) .

###  Changes meaning you no longer qualify for a social welfare payment

A change in your circumstances may mean you no longer qualify for a social
welfare payment. For example, you are not entitled to Widow's, Widower's or
Surviving Civil Partner's Pension if you remarry or enter into a new civil
partnership or cohabit with someone else.

It is a criminal offence to claim a social welfare payment, if you know you
are not entitled to it. You [ can be prosecuted for claiming a social welfare
payment that you are no longer entitled to ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-
release/218fcc-welfare-cheats-cheat-us-
all/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/pressoffice/Pages/pr180417.aspx) .

###  Changes automatically made to your social welfare payment

In some cases, the Department of Social Protection will automatically change
your social welfare payment to reflect changes in your personal circumstances.
For example, if you are getting a social welfare payment, you will
automatically get an increase in your payment when you are 80 years of age.
However, in most cases you must contact the Department of Social Protection
when your circumstances change.  

##  Further information

In some cases, if you qualify for more than one payment you will have to
choose the one that is of most benefit to you. For example, though you may
qualify for Illness Benefit it may be of greater benefit for you to claim
Disability Allowance because of the additional benefits, such as Fuel
Allowance, the Living Alone Increase and the Household Benefits Package. You
can get help and advice on which social welfare payment you qualify for and
which is of most benefit to you from your [ Intreo centre or social welfare
local office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/) and your [ local Citizens Information Service
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

[ Unemployed people ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/)

[ Families and children ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/payments-
to-families-and-children/)

[ Widows, widowers and surviving civil partners ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/)

[ Guardians or orphans ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/)

[ Older and retired people ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/)

[ Sick or disabled people ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/)

[ Carers ](/en/social-welfare/carers/)

_**Page edited:** 14 January 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-
that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Changes%20that%20can%20affect%20your%20social%20welfare%20payment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-
that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-
that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Changes%20that%20can%20affect%20your%20social%20welfare%20payment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/changes-
that-can-affect-your-social-welfare-payment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Examples of how social welfare payments are taxed_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-taxed/)

See examples of how social welfare payments are taxed, such as Maternity
Benefit, Jobseeker’s Benefit, and Illness Benefit.

2783.1257

  * [ _How parents' income can affect Supplementary Welfare Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-supplementary-welfare-allowance/)

Your parents' income may be taken into account when you apply for
Supplementary Welfare Allowance. Find out how the ‘benefit and privilege’ you
get from living with your parents is assessed.

2710.5872

  * [ _Taxation of social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)

Find out which social welfare payments are taxable, and which payments are
not.

2583.8862

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

