**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Death related benefits ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/) >
Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension

#  Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension is a
weekly payment to the husband, wife or civil partner of a deceased person.
This payment was formerly called the Widow's/Widower's (Contributory) Pension.
Either you or your deceased spouse or civil partner must have enough [ social
insurance contributions (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) .

To qualify you must, of course, be a widow, widower or surviving civil partner
and you must not be cohabiting with another person.

If you are divorced and you would have been entitled to a Widow's, Widower's
or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension had you remained married,
you keep your entitlement to the Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil
Partner's (Contributory) Pension.

If your civil partnership has been dissolved and you would have been entitled
to a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension
had you remained in the civil partnership, you keep your entitlement to the
Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension.

The pension is payable regardless of other income.

##  Rules

You may automatically qualify for a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil
Partner's (Contributory) Pension if your late spouse or civil partner was
getting a [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-
retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) which included an increase for a
dependent spouse or civil partner (or would have included an increase but for
the fact that you were getting [ State Pension (Non-Contributory)
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)
, [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-
pension/) or [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-
allowance/) ).

There is no automatic qualification if your late spouse or civil partner was
getting a mixed insurance pro-rata, EU/Bilateral Agreement pro-rata or Pre-53
pension. In all such cases you should apply for Widow's, Widower's or
Surviving Civil Partner’s Contributory Pension in the normal way.

If you do not automatically qualify for a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving
Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension, then either you or your late spouse or
civil partner must have a certain number of PRSI contributions.

###  Social insurance contributions (PRSI)

To qualify for a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension, either you or your late spouse or civil partner must
have a certain number of PRSI contributions. All the PRSI requirements must be
met on **one person's record** \- you may not combine the contributions of
both spouses or civil partners. All must have been made before the death of
the spouse or civil partner.

Virtually all PRSI contributions count towards this pension, including
contributions paid by public servants and the self-employed.

Either you or your spouse or civil partner must have:

  * At least 260 paid contributions paid before the _relevant date_ * 

**And**

  * An average of 39 paid or credited contributions in either the 3 or 5 years before the death of the spouse or civil partner or before he or she reached pension age (66) 

**Or**

  * A yearly average of at least 24 paid or credited contributions from the year of first entry into insurance until the year of death or reaching pension age. If this average is used then an average of 24 will entitle you to a minimum pension, you will need an average of 48 per year to get the full pension. 

*The relevant date is the earliest of the following dates: 

  * The date your spouse or civil partner died 
  * Your spouse’s or civil partner’s 66th birthday, if their social insurance record is used 
  * Your 66th birthday, if your social insurance record is used 

If your spouse or civil partner died before 27 December 2013, only 156 paid
contributions are required. However, the yearly average condition must still
be satisfied.

###  Contributions paid in other EU member states

If you were previously insurably employed in a country covered by EU
Regulations or in a country with which Ireland has a bilateral social security
agreement and you have paid at least one full rate PRSI contribution in
Ireland, you may combine your insurance record in that country with your Irish
PRSI contributions to help you qualify for Widow's, Widower's or Surviving
Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension.

More information is available in our document about [ combining your social
insurance contributions from abroad ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-
abroad/) .

###  Other earnings and payments

Since this is a contributory pension, you may earn any amount of money from
any other source and still remain entitled to this pension. [ It is taxable
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/) . If it is your only source of
income, you are unlikely to have to pay tax.

Generally, you cannot get a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension and another social welfare payment at the same time.
For example, if you are entitled to a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil
Partner's (Contributory) Pension and a [ State Pension (Contributory)
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) ,
you will be paid whichever is the higher amount. If you wish to receive the
lower amount, you should contact the Department of Social Protection (see
'Where to apply' below).

However, you can get a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension and half-rate [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/) , [ Health and Safety
Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/health-safety-benefit/) , [
Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/)
and [ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-
allowance/) if you also qualify for one of these payments.

You can claim [ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/working-family-payment/) (if you meet the criteria) and get a
Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Contributory Pension at the
same time. Your widow's pension is assessed as means.

You cannot get a [ training allowance ](/en/education/further-education-and-
training/training-allowances/) at the same time as a Widow’s, Widower’s or
Surviving Civil Partner’s (Contributory) Pension.

You cannot get a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension in addition to full payment on a [ Community Employment
Scheme ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-
schemes/community-employment-scheme/) . You will be paid by the CE sponsor and
your payment will be the equivalent of your previous personal rate of Widow's,
Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension plus €27.50 per
week.

###  Duration

The pension remains payable while you remain widowed or a surviving civil
partner. If you re-marry or start to cohabit, it is no longer payable.

You may get [ increases for qualified children ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-
in-your-payment-for-a-child-dependant/) with your pension - these remain
payable while the child is aged under 18 and they may then be continued until
age 22 if the child is in full-time education.

###  Other payments for widowed people and surviving civil partners

Under the Occupational Injuries Scheme, a widow's, widower's or surviving
civil partner's pension may be payable if the death was due to an occupational
injury or disease.

People getting a Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension are eligible for the [ Household Benefits Package
](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/household-benefits-
package/) if they meet the usual conditions.

If your spouse or civil partner was getting a Household Benefits Package when
they died you can keep the package if you are aged 60 or over (even though you
do not meet the usual age requirement).

The [ Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant ](/en/social-welfare/death-
related-benefits/widowed-parents-bereavement-grant/) is a once-off payment
available to widows, widowers or surviving civil partners with dependent
children.

##  Rates

**Weekly** **Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Contributory)
Pension rate 2024**

**Contributions** |  **Aged under 66** |  **Aged 66 and over** |  **Increase for a child dependant**  
---|---|---|---  
48 or more contributions  |  €237.50  |  €277.30  |  €46 (child under 12)  €54 (child aged 12 and over)   
36-47 contributions  |  €233.90  |  €271.90   
24-35 contributions  |  €231.20  |  €265.50   
  
A [ Living Alone Increase ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/living-alone-allowance/) and/or an [ Increase for people aged 66 or
over living on an island ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/island-increase/) may also be paid.

You automatically get an increase of €10 in your pension when you reach 80
years of age.

##  How to apply

To apply fill in a [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's
(Contributory) Pension form (pdf).
](https://assets.gov.ie/10292/5169665231c74917832dbd83eece85ad.pdf)

A claim for Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner’s Contributory
Pension may be backdated for a maximum period of 6 months. Backdating of a
late claim beyond 6 months will be considered in circumstances where you
failed to claim because of:

  * Incorrect information being supplied by the Department or 
  * Your incapacity by illness or infirmity 

##  Where to apply

###  Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension)

Department of Social Protection

Pensions Services Offices  
College Road  
Sligo  
F91 T384  
Ireland

**Tel:** (071) 915 7100 or 0818 200 400

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-widowers-contributory-
pension/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/apply-for-widowers-contributory-
pension/)

**Email:** [ widows.con@welfare.ie ](mailto:widows.con@welfare.ie)

If you wish to talk to someone face-to-face about your pension entitlements,
you can visit your local [ Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) , Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office.

_**Page edited:** 5 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Widow%27s%2C%20Widower%27s%20or%20Surviving%20Civil%20Partner%27s%20%28Contributory%29%20%20Pension&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Widow%27s%2C%20Widower%27s%20or%20Surviving%20Civil%20Partner%27s%20%28Contributory%29%20%20Pension&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-
pension/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s (Non-Contributory) Pension_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)

The Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner’s Non-Contributory Pension
is payable to widowed people or surviving civil partners without dependent
children who do not qualify for a contributory pension and who pass a means
test.

3263.0632

  * [ _Widowed or Surviving Civil Partner Grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-parents-bereavement-grant/)

Outlines the rules, regulations and application procedure for the Widowed or
Surviving Civil Partner Grant which is paid to people with dependent children.

2274.5342

  * [ _Bringing your non-EEA spouse or civil partner home to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-non-eea-spouse/)

A step-by-step guide to the immigration process for your non-EEA spouse or
civil partner. Outlines the process for bringing your spouse or civil partner
who is not from the EEA, the EU, the UK or Switzerland, home to Ireland to
live and work.

1568.2444

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

