**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Social welfare payments and work ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-
and-work/) > Short-Term Enterprise Allowance

#  Short-Term Enterprise Allowance

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Short-Term Enterprise Allowance (STEA) gives support to people who have
lost their job and want to start their own business.

To qualify you must be getting Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) or Jobseeker’s Benefit
Self-Employed (JBSE). There is no qualifying period, which means you do not
need to have been getting JB or JBSE for a certain period of time. However,
you will not qualify if you are getting JB or JBSE and working part-time.

The Short-Term Enterprise Allowance is paid instead of your JB or JBSE for a
maximum of 9 months. It ends when your entitlement to JB or JBSE ends (that is
at either 9 or 6 months).

##  Rules

To qualify for the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance you must be getting, or
have an entitlement to, [ Jobseeker’s Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's Benefit Self-Employed
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/) .

Your business plan must be approved in advance in writing by a Case Officer
based in an Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office - see 'How to apply'
below.

Seasonal, temporary or part time self-employment does not qualify for the
STEA.

You must contact the Department of Social Protection (DSP) immediately if your
self-employment ends or you take up employment.

If you are unemployed when your entitlement to STEA ends you will not
immediately re-qualify for JB or JBSE. However, you can apply for [
Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/) , which is a means-tested payment.

###  Employment grants

Employment grants from a Local Enterprise Office (LEO) or a local development
company do not affect your entitlement to the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance.

###  Help with starting a business

In addition to income support (your weekly payment), you can also get
financial support with the costs of setting up your business. These supports
are provided under a scheme called the [ Enterprise Support Grant (ESG)
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/52fb76-enterprise-support-grant/) . (The ESG
replaced the Technical Assistance and Training Scheme.)

You can only get the ESG if you have been approved for either the Back to Work
Enterprise Allowance or the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance. The business plan
you submit as part of your application for the scheme must set out the
rationale and requirement for financial support. The ESG is paid to people
getting the STEA on a pro-rata basis - a maximum of €1000 can be paid to
people on a 9-month STEA and a maximum of €625 to people on a 6-month STEA.
You must be able to make a matching contribution of between 10% and 20% to
access grant support. There is a [ list of items that qualify for grant
support (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/19684/fd79766537b94c9f8fc49e0f0c0688d9.pdf) . You need
to provide documentary evidence of the costs (quotations from at least 2
suppliers or, if a single supplier, the reasons for choosing a single
supplier).

Some items not eligible for grant support under the ESG include:

  * Building/premises rental costs 
  * Cost of travel 
  * Insurance (except public liability) 
  * Personal clothing and uniforms (except protective clothing) 
  * Professional development programmes arranged by professional and regulatory bodies 
  * Purchase of any type of vehicle 
  * Stock-in-trade 
  * Training or education other than that specified 
  * Utility costs, connection or supply and local authority rates 

You can get more information about  becoming self-employed  and [ setting up a
business ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/starting-a-
business/) .

##  Rates

If you qualify, the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance replaces your Jobseeker’s
Benefit or Jobseeker's Benefit Self-Employed. The STEA will be paid at the
same rate as your JB or JBSE, including any increases for adult and child
dependants. It ends when your entitlement to JB or JBSE ends.

You do not pay PRSI or Universal Social Charge on the STEA. However the STEA
is subject to [ income tax ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/taxation-of-social-welfare-payments/)
in the same way as JB or JBSE. (Note that this is different from the [ Back to
Work Enterprise Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-
work/back-to-work-enterprise-allowance/) which is not taxable).

###  Extra benefits

You can keep any extra (or _secondary_ benefits) that you were getting with
your JB or JBSE provided you continue to satisfy the conditions. For example,
[ a medical card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/)
and [ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/)
.

##  How to apply

To apply for the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance, complete application [ form
STEA 1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/42215/5af5c8da83f247ceabafee339b28c5d0.pdf) .

You should return form STEA 1 to the Case Officer in your local Intreo Centre
or Social Welfare Branch Office.

The Case Officer will look at your business proposal and may discuss certain
aspects of it with you and the Enterprise Officer in your Local Development
Company. You must not take up self-employment until you get written approval
from the Department of Social Protection.

If you are accepted on to the Short-Term Enterprise Allowance, you must [
register as self-employed with the Revenue Commissioners
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/business/running/registering-tax.html) . You can
find more information on self-employment from [ Revenue
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact/index.html) .

##  Where to apply

You should apply to the Jobs Case Officer in your [ Intreo Centre or Social
Welfare Branch Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .

_**Page edited:** 28 September 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/short-term-enterprise-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Short-
Term%20Enterprise%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/short-term-enterprise-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/short-term-enterprise-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Short-
Term%20Enterprise%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/short-term-enterprise-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Back to Work Enterprise Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/back-to-work-enterprise-allowance/)

If you are getting certain social welfare payments, there are supports to help
you become self-employed. Find out about the Back to Work Enterprise Allowance
scheme.

1271.3026

  * [ _Renting your property for short-term lets_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/renting-your-property-for-shortterm-lets/)

Information about the tax implications and planning rules if you are renting
your property or a room in your property to visitors for short-term lets.

1062.0593

  * [ _Case study: Jobseeker’s Benefit and systematic short time work_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-work/)

This is a case study showing you how to calculate the length of time a
systematic short time worker can get Jobseeker's Benefit.

867.23584

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

