**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for unemployed people ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/) >
Information for younger jobseekers

#  Information for younger jobseekers

  * Introduction 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Rate of Jobseeker's Allowance for people under 25 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit 
  * Students 
  * Back to Education Allowance 
  * The Youth Guarantee 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Young people must meet the same [ conditions as other jobseekers ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/rules-for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/) to get a
jobseeker's payment but you may need targeted supports to help you enter the
workforce. A Youth Guarantee was introduced (see below) to support all young
jobseekers and give you access to training, education, work experience or
full-time employment.

##  Jobseeker's Allowance

If you have just left school you cannot get [ Jobseeker's Allowance
](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) . To get
Jobseeker's Allowance you must have been out of school for 3 months and you
must be at least 18 years of age. The 3-month period starts from the day you
leave school or the day following your last exam if you are doing exams.

People aged under 25 who do not have children get a reduced rate of
Jobseeker's Allowance. If you take up a place on an education, training or
work experience scheme, you will get a higher rate of payment. You can visit
our pages on [ education and training options ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-
education/education-training-and-development-option/) and on [ employment
support schemes ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-
support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/) to get more information on the
rates paid.

##  Rate of Jobseeker's Allowance for people under 25

**Maximum rate of JA for people under 25** **Age** |  **Personal rate** |  **Increase for an adult dependant**  
---|---|---  
18 - 24  |  €141.70  |  €141.70   
  
The reduced personal and qualified adult rates of Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA)
for people under 25 do not apply to:

  * People with dependent children 
  * People living independently and getting a state housing support such as Rent Supplement, Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS) or Housing Assistance Payment (HAP), Local Authority Housing or housing provided by certain Approved Housing Bodies 
  * People transferring from Disability Allowance to JA 
  * People whose claim is linked to a previous JA claim made within the previous 12 months to which the maximum personal rate applied 
  * Certain children who were in the care of the HSE or the Child and Family Agency (TUSLA) during the 12 months before reaching 18. These people are assessed using the JA rate for people aged 25 or over. 

If you were getting an age-related reduced rate of JA and you take part in a
course of education or training or an employment scheme, the reduced personal
rate of payment applicable to that course or scheme will apply as long as you
are aged under 25. When you complete the course, you will go back to your
previous age-related JA rate.

###  Living in family home

If you are under 25 and you are living with a parent or a step-parent in the
family home, your [ parents' income is taken into account when being assessed
for Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-parents-income-can-affect-
jobseekers-allowance/) . No assessment is made if you are living with other
relatives, for example, a brother or sister or with non-relatives.

##  Jobseeker's Benefit

You must have at least 104 social insurance contributions (2 years) to qualify
for [ Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) . This means that many young people do not qualify
for Jobseeker’s Benefit if they lose their job or cannot find employment. If
you worked part-time during school or college, you may have enough PRSI
contributions to qualify for JB, but if your average weekly earnings were
below €300 you may only qualify for a lower rate of JB.

##  Students

Third-level students cannot claim Jobseeker's Allowance or Benefit while you
are studying full-time. This disqualification also applies to the summer
holiday periods between academic years (unless you are a mature student or you
are getting Back to Education Allowance). However, once you have finished
college permanently, you can claim a jobseeker's payment if you cannot find
work. This is also the case if you leave college without finishing your
course. You may be able to claim a jobseeker’s payment while you are working
on a project or research thesis if you are available for work during this
time.

[ Student credits ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Can-I-qualify-for-student-
credits.aspx) may help you to qualify for Jobseeker's Benefit. They are
awarded where you were a full-time student during the relevant tax year and
had paid contributions before going to college or during the period spent at
college.

You must have:

  * Paid contributions at Class A 
  * Started full-time education before 23 years of age 
  * Re-entered insurable employment after the course is finished 

Student credits can only be awarded only once.

##  Back to Education Allowance

All [ Back to Education Allowance (BTEA) ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-
education/back-to-education-allowance/) participants aged under 26 who were
getting a reduced age-related Jobseeker’s Allowance payment, will get a
maximum BTEA rate. Your means will be deducted from this rate. If you were
getting the Back to Education Allowance during your second-level studies, you
can claim JA immediately.

##  The Youth Guarantee

The [ Youth Guarantee
](https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1036&langId=en) aims to provide
young people under the age of 25 with a good quality offer of employment,
education, training or apprenticeship within a short time of leaving education
or becoming unemployed. It is an EU initiative developed in response to the
youth unemployment crisis.

In Ireland, the [ Guarantee was introduced on a phased basis (pdf)
](https://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=13642&langId=en) . Aims under
the Guarantee include:

  * Young people under 18 who have left the school system without completing secondary education and who are unemployed will be given a ‘second chance’ education pathway such as Youthreach or will be supported to re-enter the school system. 
  * Young people aged 18-24 who have been unemployed for 4 months will get help to find work or will get an offer of quality training, education or work experience. 

Under the Youth Guarantee a range of initiatives are being put in place.

The qualifying period for [ JobsPlus (called JobsPlus Youth)
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-
schemes/jobsplus/) for jobseekers under 25 is 4 months. (It remains at 12
months for other jobseekers.) Eligible young people will be given
certification that they qualify for the JobsPlus subsidy and they can use this
when applying for jobs.

You can find more information about employment supports for young jobseekers
in our document about [ Employment schemes for young people
](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/youth-
employment-support-scheme/) .

##  Where to apply

You can apply for Jobseeker's Benefit or Jobseeker's Allowance:

  * Online at [ MyWelfare.ie ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/)
  * In person at your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office. ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/)

_**Page edited:** 8 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Information%20for%20younger%20jobseekers&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[ ](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=Information%20for%20younger%20jobseekers&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/younger-jobseekers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Professional artists on Jobseekers Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance-professional-artists/)

A scheme for professional artists on Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) that allows
you to focus on your artistic work and develop your portfolio.

1400.1826

  * [ _Employment services for jobseekers_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/)

Read about the employment services and supports available to jobseekers in
Ireland.

1341.7349

  * [ _Housing and other supports for homeless people_ ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)

Housing and other supports for homeless people.

559.5813

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

