**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for older and retired people ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/) > Income supports for older people

#  Income supports for older people

  * Information 
  * Social insurance payments 

##  Information

A range of payments are made to older people by the Department of Social
Protection (DSP) and the Health Service Executive. If you are unsure whether
or not you would qualify for a payment, you should apply anyway.

Generally payments are made up of a personal payment for yourself and extra
amounts for your dependent spouse, civil partner or cohabitant and any
dependent children. A cohabitant is a person living in an intimate and
committed relationship with a person of the same or opposite sex who is not
that person’s spouse, civil partner, or a close relative.

You should apply to the Department of Social Protection for your pension at
least **3 months in advance** .

##  Social insurance payments

You need enough [ PRSI contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-classes/) to qualify for
these payments. Apply to the Department of Social Protection.

####  **State Pension (Contributory)**

The [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-contributory/) is payable from the age of 66. You are
allowed to have income from any other source while you receive this pension,
but both the income and the pension are taxable.

There are a number of pro-rata State Pensions (Contributory) which are paid at
a lower rate. These were introduced to deal with issues that arose as a result
of people paying different types of social insurance contributions or not
paying contributions for various reasons.

Under the [ National Pensions Framework
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/234_National-Pensions-Framework.aspx) , a
number of other changes are planned to the qualifying conditions for the State
Pension (Contributory). These changes do not affect the State Pension (Non-
Contributory).  

####  **Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's Contributory Pension**

You may be eligible for [ Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner's
Contributory Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-
persons-contrib-pension/) if you are widowed or a surviving civil partner,
have not remarried or entered into a new civil partnership, and are not
cohabiting. You can transfer to the State Pension (Contributory) at the age of
66.

###  Means-tested payments

Any means you may have, such as weekly income or savings, are taken into
account for these payments, but not your own home. You must also satisfy the [
habitual residence ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
assistance-payments/habitual-residence-condition/) condition. Apply to the
Department of Social Protection.

####  **State Pension (Non-Contributory)**

The [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-non-contributory/) is a payment for people aged 66 or
over who do not qualify for a State Pension (Contributory).

####  **Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner's Non-Contributory
Pension**

If you are a widowed person or a surviving civil partner who is not entitled
to a Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner's Contributory Pension, has
not remarried or entered into a new civil partnership, has no dependent
children and is not cohabiting, you may be eligible for a [ Widow's, Widower's
or Surviving Civil Partner's Non-Contributory Pension ](/en/social-
welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/) . This is
a means-tested payment. At age 66 you transfer to the State Pension (Non-
Contributory).

###  Private pensions

####  **Occupational and personal pensions**

[ Occupational pensions ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/pensions/occupational-pensions/) are organised by employers to provide
pensions to employees on retirement or to surviving dependants on the death of
an employee. Personal pensions or [ Personal Retirement Savings Accounts
(PRSAs) ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/personal-retirement-
savings-accounts/) are organised individually by self-employed people or
employed people who do not have an occupational pension scheme.

You need to deal directly with the pension provider to find out exactly what
benefits your pension gives you. The Pensions Authority is the regulatory body
for occupational pensions and PRSAs. If you have a complaint, the Authority
will advise you about your rights. The Pensions Ombudsman investigates and
decides on complaints relating to occupational pensions and PRSAs. Generally,
you may have income from other sources, for example, from work, if you are
receiving a pension. There are some restrictions on people getting both a
pension and employment income from the public sector – you should check with
the pension provider.

###  Other social welfare payments

Apply to the Department of Social Protection for these payments.

####  **Increase for Living Alone**

The [ Increase for Living Alone ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/living-alone-allowance/) is a supplementary payment for people on
social welfare pensions who are living alone. It is also available to people
under the age of 66 who get certain other payments from the Department of
Social Protection.

####  Aged 80 increase

If you are getting a social welfare pension, you automatically get an increase
in your pension when you reach 80 years of age.

####  **Increase for Living on a Specified Island**

This is an increase in the weekly payment of certain payments from the DSP, or
the EU equivalent, to people who are aged 66 or over and living on a specified
island off the coast of Ireland. The [ Increase for Living on a Specified
Island ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-increase/)
**** is to compensate for the additional costs of living on these islands
compared to living on the mainland.

####  **Household Benefits Package**

The [ Household Benefits Package ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/household-benefits-package/) includes the Electricity or Natural Gas
Allowance and a Free TV Licence. If you are aged 70 or over, you qualify
regardless of your income or who lives with you. The scheme may also be
available to people aged 66 and over who get certain social welfare payments
or whose income is below certain limits. Apply to the Department of Social
Protection.

####  **Free travel**

If you are over the age of 66 or getting a carers' or certain other social
welfare payments, you can get a Free Travel Pass, entitling you to free travel
at any time on bus, road, rail and DART services operated by Bus Átha Cliath,
Bus Éireann, Iarnród Éireann, LUAS services, the Aran Islands ferry service
and on certain private services which have opted into the scheme.

You can also use your Free Travel Pass on any of the 34 schemes under the
Rural Transport Initiative. People who are entitled to free travel are also
entitled to have their spouse/partner travel free with them or may be entitled
to a Companion Pass on medical grounds. The [ Free Travel Scheme ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) also covers public
transport services in Northern Ireland for people over 66 years of age who
have a Senior SmartPass Card.

####  **National Fuel Scheme**

The [ National Fuel Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/fuel-allowance/) is a means-tested payment to help people who cannot
afford their own heating costs. You may qualify if you get certain payments
from the Department of Social Protection or the EU equivalent.

####  **Carers**

If you are providing full-time care to someone who is ill or incapacitated,
you may qualify for a carer’s payment. More information is available in our
document on [ payments to carers ](/en/social-welfare/carers/payments-to-
carers/) .

###  Housing

####  **Housing Aid for Older People Scheme**

The [ Housing Aid for Older People Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/) is a local authority grant
used to improve homes that are below basic standards. It is targeted mainly at
older people living in rural areas. By paying the grant, the local authority
aims to help the person stay in his/her own home. Contact your local
authority.

####  **Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability**

If your home needs to be adapted to enable you to continue to live there, you
may qualify for a [ Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability
](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-
and-people-with-disabilities/housing-adaptation-grant-for-people-with-
disability/) . Contact your local authority.

####  **Mobility Aids Grants Scheme**

The [ Mobility Aids Grant Scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/mobility-aids-grant-scheme/) provides grants to address mobility
problems in the home, for example, the grant can be used for access ramps or a
stair-lift.

####  **Better Energy Warmer Homes Scheme**

Under this scheme, services like attic insulation and draught-proofing are
provided to low-income households nationwide. There is no charge. Read more
about the [ Better Energy Warmer Homes Scheme. ](/en/housing/housing-grants-
and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/warmer-homes-scheme/)

####  **Refuse and water charges**

In some local authority areas, low-income households can avail of a waiver
(that is, a reduction or total exemption) on waste and water charges made by
private operators and by local authorities. These waivers vary greatly from
region to region and, in some areas, they are not available at all. To find
out if your local authority operates a waiver scheme, you should contact them
directly.

####  **Working in retirement**

If you are getting a means-tested payment, working or being self-employed
affects the amount of that payment. You should check with the Department of
Social Protection before taking up work to see what the effect will be. You
can have up to €200 earnings from insurable employment without affecting your
State Pension (Non-Contributory).

See [ moving from work to retirement ](/en/employment/retirement/older-people-
and-working/working-in-retirement/) for more information on working in
retirement, income tax etc.

Further information and application forms are available from [ your local
Citizen Information Centre ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) and the
Citizens Information Phone Service at 0818 07 4000.

_**Page edited:** 14 October 2020 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/income-supports-for-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Income%20supports%20for%20older%20people&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/income-supports-for-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/income-supports-for-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Income%20supports%20for%20older%20people&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/income-supports-for-older-
people/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Checklist: entitlements for older people_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/older-people/checklist-entitlements-for-older-people/)

Quick links to entitlements and services for older people.

2151.815

  * [ _Boarding out of older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/boarding-out-of-older-people/)

Some Health Service Executive (HSE) Areas in Ireland operate a scheme where
older people are boarded out in private homes. Find out about the rules that
apply to these arrangements and how to apply.

1980.6421

  * [ _Regulation of residential care for older people_ ](/en/health/health-services/health-services-for-older-people/regulation-residential-care-older-people/)

National quality standards are enforced in both public and private nursing
homes by HIQA, the Health Information and Quality Authority. Inspection
reports are available from them.

1977.4856

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

