**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/) > Class S PRSI

#  Class S PRSI

  * What is Class S PRSI? 
  * Social welfare payments covered by Class S PRSI 
  * How much Class S PRSI do I pay? 
  * How your PRSI contributions are recorded 
  * Registering for PRSI 
  * More information 

##  What is Class S PRSI?

[ Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) contributions are
deducted from your income and used to fund social welfare benefits and
pensions.

Your [ rate of PRSI depends on your social insurance class
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-classes/#165581) .

If you are self-employed, you pay Class S PRSI. PRSI for self-employed people
was introduced in 1988.

###  **Who pays Class S PRSI?**

People who pay Class S include:

  * Farmers 
  * Professional people (for example, doctors, dentists, and solicitors) 
  * Certain company directors 
  * People in business on their own (sole traders) or in partnerships 
  * People with income from investments, rents, or maintenance payments 
  * Certain artists and childminders who are exempt from income tax 

Employees who are also self-employed in a trade or profession pay Class S PRSI
on that income, as well as their Class A PRSI contribution as an employee.

Read more about who is [ classed as self-employed
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/294bc0-operational-guidelines-prsi-for-
the-self-employed/#:~:text=Persons%20classified%20as%20self%2Demployed) on
Gov.ie.

##  Social welfare payments covered by Class S PRSI

Class S contributions only cover you for a limited number of payments. In
general, you are not covered for any short-term payments, such as illness and
disability payments.

If you pay Class S contributions and you meet all the other conditions for the
payment, you may be entitled to:

  * [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)
  * [ Adoptive Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/adoptive-benefit/)
  * [ Paternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/)
  * [ Parent's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/parents-benefit/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)
  * [ Treatment Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/treatment-benefit-scheme/)
  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/)
  * [ Guardian's Payment (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/)
  * [ Benefit payment for 65 year olds ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/payment-for-people-retired-at-65/)
  * [ Partial Capacity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/partial-capacity-benefit/)

Read more about PRSI for the self-employed in the [ Department of Social
Protection’s leaflet (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/38671/0aa2cf3d831a4076b1b6208e1287d9f9.pdf#page=null)
.

####  Class S PRSI and State Pension (Contributory)

You cannot claim your [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-
welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) until all
outstanding payments have been made.

If owe Class S PRSI contributions, your State Pension (Contributory) will only
be paid from the date that you have paid:

  * All outstanding contributions, and 
  * Any outstanding income taxes in full 

##  How much Class S PRSI do I pay?

You pay Class S PRSI of 4% on your **total income** for tax purposes. Your
total income is your gross income less [ allowable expenses
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/294bc0-operational-guidelines-prsi-for-
the-self-employed/#:~:text=What%20is%20excluded%20from%20reckonable%20income)
.

You must pay 4% of your total income or €500, whichever is greater. From 1
October 2024, the minimum contribution will increase by €150 to €650.

If you have been told by an Inspector of Taxes that you do not need to make a
tax return, but you earn more than €5,000 in a year, you pay a flat rate
contribution of €310 to the Department of Social Protection.

If you earn less than €5,000 from self-employment in a year, you are exempt
from PRSI, but you may pay €500 as a [ voluntary contributor (if you meet the
other conditions) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-
insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-contributions/) . From 1 October 2024, the
minimum contribution will increase by €150 to €650.

If you help your spouse or civil partner with running the family business, but
you are not their employee, you pay Class S contributions. Read more about [
employing family members and PRSI
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/#90d8ef) .

##  How your PRSI contributions are recorded

If you are self-employed, you pay [ Class S social insurance contributions
directly to Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/guide-to-self-assessment/prsi-need-pay.aspx) , when you send in
your tax returns for the year.

Revenue then pays the money into the Social Insurance Fund, and sends a record
of the contributions you have paid to the Department of Social Protection.

You can request a copy of your complete [ PRSI record online at MyWelfare.ie
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/statements-refunds-and-
calculators/contribution-statement/) . If you have difficulty using this
online facility, you can contact the PRSI Records section for assistance (see
'More information' below).

Note that you pay Class S contributions in an annual payment for your full tax
year. There is no mechanism for awarding credits for a full year or part of a
year.

##  Registering for PRSI

When you take up self-employment, you should tell Revenue that you are now
self-employed and you wish to register for self-assessment. You can register
with Revenue as [ a self-employed sole trader online
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/starting-a-business/registering-for-tax/how-to-
register-for-tax-as-a-sole-trader.aspx) .

Certain people can only register using the paper form: [ Form TR1 - Tax
Registration form for Sole Traders, Trusts and Partnerships (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/self-assessment-and-self-
employment/documents/form-tr1.pdf) .

When you register for self-assessment with Revenue, you will automatically be
registered for PRSI purposes with the Department of Social Protection.

You can also [ register as an employer for PAYE
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/employing-people/becoming-an-employer-and-ongoing-
obligations/registration-of-employers-for-paye-purposes/index.aspx) using
Revenue’s online service, if you need to do so at this stage.

##  More information

If you have questions about your PRSI, you can:

  * Use Revenue’s online [ MyAccount and ROS services ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/index.aspx)
  * Contact the relevant area using the contact details [ on Revenue’s Contact us page ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/Index.aspx) (you may need to enter your [ PPS number ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) to see the phone number) 
  * [ Make an in-person or virtual appointment ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-service-contact/appointment-service.aspx) with Revenue (if you have been unable to resolve your query online or over the phone) 
  * Visit a [ public Revenue office ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/customer-service-contact/public-offices.aspx) during opening times (if you have been unable to resolve your query online or over the phone and have not made an appointment) 

You can also [ contact your local Intreo office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) , or [ your
local Citizens Information Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

###  PRSI Records

Department of Social Protection

McCarter's Road  
Ardaravan  
Buncrana  
Donegal  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 or 0818 690 690

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/80e5ab-prsi-pay-related-
social-insurance/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/80e5ab-prsi-pay-related-
social-insurance/)

**Email:** [ contributionstatement@welfare.ie
](mailto:contributionstatement@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 22 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-
prsi/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Class%20S%20PRSI&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-
prsi/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-
prsi/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Class%20S%20PRSI&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-
prsi/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Social insurance classes_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-classes/)

The social welfare benefits you can get are determined by the PRSI Class you
are in. An overview of social insurance classes.

1088.6676

  * [ _Checklist: information for self-employed people_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/checklist-entitlements-and-services-for-self-employed-people/)

Quicklinks to useful documents about self-employment.

1078.822

  * [ _Part-time work and social insurance (PRSI)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-time-work-and-social-insurance-prsi/)

This page explains how part-time work can affect your PRSI contributions.

994.62646

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

