**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> Social welfare system in Ireland

#  Social welfare system in Ireland

  * Information 
  * Types of social welfare payment 
  * What are the rules governing payments? 
  * What are the payment rates? 
  * How to apply for a social welfare payment 

##  Information

The social welfare system is a State financial support for people who might
need help due to different life situations. This can include people who are
unemployed, sick, disabled, retired, or raising children on their own.

##  Types of social welfare payment

The social welfare system in Ireland is divided into 3 main types of payments.
These are:

  * Social insurance payments 
  * Social assistance payments (also knowns as means-tested payments) 
  * Universal payments 

You can find an explanation for each type below.

With all social welfare payments, you must meet specific circumstances to
qualify for the payment. For example, to claim the [ One-Parent Family Payment
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/) , you must be
parenting alone and not cohabiting with your spouse or partner.

There is also a range of [ employment schemes and other supports
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/unemployment-and-
redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/) which
support long-term unemployed people to return to work.

You must be [ habitually resident to qualify for social assistance payments
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-residence-condition/) .  

**Type of payment** |  **Details** |  **Example**  
---|---|---  
Social insurance payments  |  You can claim a social insurance payment if you:  · Have enough insurance contributions (PRSI conditions)  · Meet the specific conditions  These conditions vary, depending on the payment you apply for.  You can find information on PRSI contribution conditions for each payment in a [ guide published by the Deaprtment of Social Protection (pdf) ](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/11117/6beb1ad2f51346f4ad6f27db1c473e59.pdf#page=null) .  |  [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) [ Illness Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/disability-benefit/) [ Maternity Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/) [ Invalidity Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) [ Carer's Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/carers/carers-benefit/) [ State Pension (Contributory) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)  
Means-tested payments  (also known as social assistance payments)  |  You will get a means-tested payment if you do not have enough PRSI contributions to qualify for the equivalent social insurance-based payments.  A means test is where the Department of Social Protection examines all your income to see if it is below a certain level.  How your means are tested depends on the payment.  You may be allowed some income or savings before your entitlement to a payment is affected. This is known as an income disregard.  |  If you do not have enough social insurance contributions to apply for [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) , you can apply for [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) .   
Universal payments  |  You can get a universal payment regardless of your income or social insurance record.  To qualify, you must meet specific personal circumstances.  |  [ Child Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/child-benefit/)  
  
##  What are the rules governing payments?

The rules governing social welfare payments are set out in legislation and
Operational Guidelines.

Most of the detailed [ Operational Guidelines governing social welfare
payments are available on gov.ie
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/97885-operational-guidelines/) .

####  **Who decides if I can receive a payment?**

For most social insurance and social assistance payments, Deciding Officers
decide if you are entitled to the payment. Deciding Officers are social
welfare officials appointed under the social welfare legislation.

Other payments such as those under the [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance
Scheme ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) and
certain administrative schemes are made by other officials within the
Department of Social Protection.

Some payments are not based in legislation but are based on government
decisions and administrative guidelines. For example:

  * [ Christmas Bonus ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/christmas-bonus/)
  * [ Fuel Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)

**Can I appeal a decision to not award me a payment?**

If you are not happy with a decision, [ you can appeal decisions for payments
that are based in legislation ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-appeals/) .

**If a claim is fraudulent**

If a person makes a false or misleading statement to get a social welfare
payment for themselves or for any other person, they may face large fines or
prison for up to 3 years.

The Department of Social Protection has a [ Compliance and Fraud Strategy
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Compliance-and-Anti-Fraud-
Strategy-2014-2018-.aspx) that aims to reduce social welfare fraud.

You can [ report possible cases of fraud to the Department
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/report-suspected-social-welfare-fraud/) .

##  What are the payment rates?

###  **Rates of payment and dependants**

There are 2 kinds of social welfare payments.

  * Payments for the claimant (you), known as the _personal rate_ of payment 
  * Payments for any adult and child dependants 

You can read the details in the [ SW 19 Rates of Payment Booklet
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/sw19.aspx) that the Department updates each
year.

###  **Adult dependant**

An adult dependant of a claimant is called a _qualified adult_ .

A payment for a qualified adult may be paid for a person who is wholly or
mainly maintained by the claimant and is either:

  * A spouse, civil partner or cohabitant 

**Or**

  * A person over 16 years of age who is caring for a child dependant of the claimant 

[ Learn more about claiming for an adult dependant.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/)

###  **Child dependant**

A child dependant is referred to as a _qualified child_ .

A qualified child must:

  * Live in the State (be resident) 
  * Not be detained in a reformatory or industrial school 
  * Satisfy the age conditions 

Children under 18 are regarded as qualified children. Payments for child
dependants are made for children over 18 in some circumstances.

[ Learn more about claiming for a child dependant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-and-increase-in-your-
payment-for-a-child-dependant/) .

##  How to apply for a social welfare payment

You’ll need to submit an application form to apply for a social welfare
payment.

You can apply for some [ social welfare payments online
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/) . You need a verified MyGovID account to
apply for some payments.

You can also:

  * Contact your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) for an application form 
  * Request application forms online 
  * Find a [ list of social welfare forms on gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/a9ac9-social-welfare-application-forms/)

**Public services card**

When you apply for a social welfare payment, you will need to supply or
register for a [ Public Services Card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/public-services-card/) . You may also need your [ Personal Public
Service (PPS) number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) .

_**Page edited:** 9 August 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-system-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20welfare%20system%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-system-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-system-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20welfare%20system%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-system-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

2157.6895

  * [ _Social welfare payments and living on a specified island_ ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-increase/)

If you are getting a certain social welfare payment and living on a specified
island off the coast of Ireland, you can get an increase in your social
welfare payment .

2151.5464

  * [ _Applying for social welfare payments and services online_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

2007.9431

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

