**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Extra social welfare benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/) > Social welfare payments and living on a specified island

#  Social welfare payments and living on a specified island

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

People living on islands can face extra expenses travelling to the mainland to
avail of services. If you are getting one of the social welfare payments
listed below and living on certain islands off the coast of Ireland you can
get an increase in your social welfare payment (sometimes referred to as an
Island Allowance). The purpose of the increase is to compensate for the
additional costs of living on an island off the coast of Ireland.

People getting certain pensions from another EU state are entitled to an
increase for living on a specified island.

##  Rules

To qualify for an increase in the rate of your social welfare payment you must
ordinarily live on a [ specified island off the coast of Ireland
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/pages/800_increase-for-living-on-a-specified-
island.aspx) , be 66 years of age or over and getting one of the following
payments:

  * [ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)
  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/)
  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Carer’s Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/)
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * Widow’s/Widower’s Benefit under the [ Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/occupational-injuries-benefit-overview/)

If you are 66 years of age or over and getting a comparable pension to those
listed above from another EU State, you are also entitled to the increase.

If you live on a specified island and are under 66 years of age you will
qualify for an increase in your social welfare payment if you are getting one
of the following social welfare payments:

  * [ Invalidity Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * Incapacity Supplement under the Occupational Injuries Benefit Scheme 
  * Blind Pension 

If you are under 66 years of age and getting a comparable pension to those
listed above from another EU State, you are also entitled to the increase.

##  Rates

Since January 2021, the Increase for Living on a Specified Island is €20 each
week.

##  Where to apply

There is no application form to get an increase in the rate of your social
welfare payment for living on a specifed island. You are assessed for an
increase at the time of your application for a social welfare payment. If you
are on a qualifying payment you automatically get the increase when you reach
66 years of age.  
  
If you have any questions about the increase in the rate of your social
welfare payment for living on a specifed island or whether you are entitled to
it, you should contact the [ section in the Department of Social Protection
which pays your social welfare payment
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/contact-us_home.aspx) .  
  
  

_**Page edited:** 6 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-
increase/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Social%20welfare%20payments%20and%20living%20on%20a%20specified%20island&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-
increase/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-
increase/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Social%20welfare%20payments%20and%20living%20on%20a%20specified%20island&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-
increase/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Going abroad or on holidays and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/going-abroad-and-social-welfare-payments/)

Outlines the social welfare payments that will continue to be paid if you go
abroad. It also lists the payments that will not be paid if you go abroad.

2429.4875

  * [ _Applying for social welfare payments and services online_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

2285.5352

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

2279.5823

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

