**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Payments for unemployed people ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/) >
Self-employed and unemployment

#  Self-employed and unemployment

  * Introduction 
  * Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) 
  * Jobseeker's Allowance 
  * Supplementary Welfare Allowance 
  * Other benefits 

##  Introduction

Self-employed people can become unemployed if their business has to close
down. It may also be the case, though you continue to be self-employed the
amount of work you are getting has reduced so much that it no longer provides
you with a sufficient income.

If you find yourself unemployed or you are getting less work than before you
may qualify for a jobseeker's payment. You do **not** need to de-register as
self-employed to get a payment. However you must meet [ the conditions that
apply to jobseeker's payments ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/rules-
for-getting-a-jobseekers-payment/) .

If you do not qualify for a social welfare payment you may be eligible to pay
[ voluntary contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-contributions/) .

##  Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed)

[ Jobseeker’s Benefit (Self-Employed) (JBSE) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/) is a weekly payment from the
Department of Social Protection (DSP) to people who lose their self-
employment.

To qualify for Jobseeker’s Benefit (Self-Employed) you need:

  * At least 156 weeks of Class S contributions **or** at least 104 weeks of paid Class A or H PRSI since first starting work 
  * 52 weeks of Class S contributions paid in the relevant tax year. The relevant tax year is the second-last complete tax year before the year in which your claim is made. So, for claims made in 2023, the relevant tax year is 2021. 

To get Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) you must stop all self-employment
activity. However, you can work as an employee for up to 3 days each week and
continue to get Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed).

If you don't qualify for Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed) you may qualify
for Jobseeker's Allowance.  

##  Jobseeker's Allowance

[ Jobseeker's Allowance (JA) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-allowance/) is a weekly payment from DSP to jobseeker's. To
get Jobseeker’s Allowance you must be [ habitually resident ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-
residence-condition/) and pass a [ means test ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test-for-
jobseekers-allowance/) . If you are self-employed, you may be entitled to
Jobseeker's Allowance depending on your earnings from your business. You do
not need to close your business or stop working as self-employed for you to
get Jobseeker’s Allowance and you don't have to be unemployed for at least 4
out of 7 days, as for Jobseeker's Benefit. You will get Jobseeker’s Allowance
if your income is below a certain level.

**Income from self-employment and the means test**  
The earnings from your business will be assessed in the means test for
Jobseeker’s Allowance. The assessment must reflect the income you may
reasonably be expected to get from your business over the next 12 months.
Income for the last 12 months will be taken as a guide but allowing for any
factors which it is known will vary. You should be prepared to discuss these
factors when you are assessed for Jobseeker’s Allowance.

Earnings are assessed as gross income less work-related expenses over 12
months. Your expected annual earnings from self-employment is divided by 52 to
find your weekly means from self-employment. Any ‘drawings’ you take from the
business is not an allowable expense. If your ‘drawings’ from the business are
greater than the level of income calculated, the ‘drawings’ are assessed as
cash income. There is no exhaustive list of all business expenses allowed
because expenses vary with the nature and extent of the self-employment.
However the following are the main allowable expenses in most cases:

  * Materials (supplies costs) 
  * Motor running costs (portion applicable to business) 
  * Depreciation of machinery or equipment 
  * Insurance relating to the business 
  * Telephone (portion applicable to business) 
  * Lighting and heating (for business and not domestic use) 
  * Advertising 
  * Bank charges 
  * Stationery 
  * Van leasing 
  * Any other costs associated with running the business (household running costs are not allowed as deductions against business profit) 

To prove the level of income from your business you must give your receipts
and payments (documentation showing money coming in and out of your business)
or audited accounts to the person dealing with your application in your Intreo
Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office.

**When you apply for Jobseeker’s Allowance**  
Usually, you will be asked for your receipts and payments or audited accounts
for the current and previous year. For example, if you apply for Jobseeker's
Allowance in April 2023 you will be asked for your receipts and payments from
January to April 2023 and for 2022. However, in certain cases you may be
required to show audited accounts for the last two or more years. Find out
more about [ signing on for a jobseeker’s payment ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/signing-on/) .

You may qualify for Supplementary Welfare Allowance while you are waiting to
be assessed for a jobseeker’s payment or if you don’t qualify for a
jobseeker’s payment.  

##  Supplementary Welfare Allowance

[ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) provides a basic weekly allowance to
eligible people who have little or no income. If your weekly income is below
the Supplementary Welfare Allowance rate for your family size, a payment may
be made to bring your income up to the appropriate Supplementary Welfare
Allowance rate.

You cannot get Supplementary Welfare Allowance if you are working more than 30
hours per week. If you have claimed a jobseeker’s payment but it has not yet
been paid and you have no other income, you may qualify for Supplementary
Welfare Allowance while you are awaiting payment.

##  Other benefits

If your income is below a certain amount you may get a [ medical card
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) or a [ GP visit
card ](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/gp-visit-cards/) .

You may get [ help with paying your rent ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) . If you are in local authority housing, you
should contact your local authority and ask for a review of your rent because
of the reduction in your income.

You may get help with the cost of uniforms and footwear for children attending
school. The [ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance Scheme
](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-
footwear-allowance/) operates from 1 June to 30 September each year.

If you have an additional need, for example, you need help with a funeral
bill, a range of [ discretionary payments are provided by the Department of
Social Protection's representative ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/additional-needs-payment/) in your [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/) .

_**Page edited:** 3 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Self-
employed%20and%20unemployment&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Self-
employed%20and%20unemployment&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-
unemployment/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Jobseeker's Benefit (Self-Employed)_ ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit-self-employed/)

Jobseeker’s Benefit (Self-Employed) is a payment to support people who lose
their self-employment.

1767.6802

  * [ _Tax for self-employed people_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-self-employed-people/)

A summary of how you are taxed if you are self-employed.

1740.5859

  * [ _Becoming self-employed_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/becoming-self-employed/)

Information about self-employment and a description of the tax and legal
implications.

1739.1995

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

