**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Social welfare payments and work ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-
and-work/) > Help with low pay

#  Help with low pay

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 

##  Introduction

There are some tax and social welfare measures which help employees on low
pay.

##  Rules

###  Working Family Payment

[ Working Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/working-
family-payment/) (formerly known as Family Income Supplement (FIS)) is a
weekly tax-free payment that gives help to those on low pay. It is available
to employees with children.

###  Getting social welfare payments

In certain circumstances, you are allowed to keep social welfare payments (or
at least part of them) when you start work. For example:

If you work part-time up to 3 days per week you may be entitled to retain part
of your [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) . If you are getting [ One-
Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-
family-payment/) you are allowed to earn a certain amount each week and keep
your payment. If you are getting a means-tested disability payment, such as
Disability Allowance or Blind Pension, you may [ earn a certain amount from
work ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/disability-
payments-and-work/) without it affecting your payment. If you are getting
Illness Benefit (for at least 6 months) or Invalidity Pension you can apply
for [ Partial Capacity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/partial-capacity-benefit/) and keep part of your payment, depending on
how restricted your capacity for work is.

####  Back to Work Enterprise Allowance

Under the [ Back to Enterprise Work Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments-and-work/back-to-work-enterprise-allowance/) , you can become
self-employed and keep a certain amount of your social welfare payment.

**Retaining Rent Supplement**

If you have been unemployed or not in full-time employment for at least 12
months and are assessed as in need of housing under the [ Rental Accommodation
Scheme ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/rental-accommodation-
scheme/) you may be entitled to retain your [ Rent Supplement. ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/)

###  Retaining medical card

If you are unemployed and you are returning to full-time or part-time work,
you can keep your medical card for 3 years provided you have been getting one
of the following for 12 months or more:

  * [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/)
  * [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/)
  * [ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-parent-family-payment/)
  * [ Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disablement-benefit/)
  * [ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)
  * [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/) or 
  * Have been on an employment incentive scheme or educational opportunity scheme 

If you take up full-time employment you will retain your medical card for 3
years from the date you start work. If you take up part-time employment the
three-year period starts from the date your income exceeds the relevant
medical card guideline.

###  Tax and PRSI

If you are on low pay you may not be liable to pay any tax because your [ tax
credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/introduction-to-income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) are more than or
equal to the amount of tax you are due to pay. People with an income below
€13,000 do not pay the [ Universal Social Charge (USC) ](/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/universal-social-charge/) .

People aged 65 and over are subject to the same general tax rules as everyone
else but they do get tax exemption limits below which they pay no tax and some
extra tax credits. Revenue's information leaflet [ Tax Exemption and Marginal
Relief (IT 8) (pdf) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/income-
tax-capital-gains-tax-corporation-tax/part-07/07-01-18.pdf) gives information
on available exemption limits and tax relief.

If you have overpaid income tax or Universal Social Charge, then you can [
claim a tax refund ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/tax-refund-when-
unemployed-or-out-of-work-sick/) . Further information about tax is also
available from [ Revenue ](http://www.revenue.ie/cont_main.htm) .

If you earn between €38 and €352 you do not have to pay [ PRSI ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance/) .
However, your employer pays PRSI. More information can be found in our
document about your [ employer's duty to pay social insurance ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/paying-social-
insurance/) .

_**Page edited:** 6 January 2022 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/help-with-low-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Help%20with%20low%20pay&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/help-with-low-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/help-with-low-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Help%20with%20low%20pay&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/help-with-low-
pay/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Applying for social welfare payments and services online_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-online/)

The MyWelfare website lets you to apply online for social welfare payments and
other services. You need a MyGovID account to access online welfare services.

1472.2009

  * [ _Social welfare payments and living on a specified island_ ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/island-increase/)

If you are getting a certain social welfare payment and living on a specified
island off the coast of Ireland, you can get an increase in your social
welfare payment .

1337.1425

  * [ _Going abroad or on holidays and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/going-abroad-and-social-welfare-payments/)

Outlines the social welfare payments that will continue to be paid if you go
abroad. It also lists the payments that will not be paid if you go abroad.

1172.5494

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

