**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Social insurance (PRSI) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/) > Voluntary social insurance contributions

#  Voluntary social insurance contributions

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Paying social insurance can help you to qualify for social insurance payments,
such as the State Pension (Contributory). If you are an employee Pay Related
Social Insurance (PRSI) deductions are made from your earnings each week.

If you are no longer an employee or if you are self-employed and you are no
longer making compulsory PRSI contributions, you can opt to make voluntary
contributions. If you are getting a social welfare payment or [ signing for
credits ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-
prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) you may get credited
contributions which will also keep your social insurance record up to date.

Voluntary contributions can help maintain your social insurance record and
help you to qualify for social insurance payments in the future. They cover
long-term benefits such as pensions. They do not cover short-term benefits for
illness, maternity or jobseekers.

You can pay voluntary contributions if you:

  * Are no longer covered by compulsory PRSI in Ireland 
  * Are no longer covered by PRSI on a compulsory or voluntary basis in another EU country 
  * Meet the age conditions - see below 

####  Age conditions for paying voluntary contributions

You pay voluntary contributions if you are under 66.

You can also pay voluntary contributions if you are aged between 66 and 70, as
long as you were born after 1 January 1958 and you do not get the State
Pension (Contributory).

####  Working outside the EU

If you are working outside the EU and not subject to Irish or EU social
insurance contributions you may also opt to pay voluntary contributions.

###  Changes to PRSI requirements for voluntary contributors

Since **6 April 2015** you need **520 paid PRSI contributions** (10 years) to
be eligible to make voluntary contributions:

  * People who became voluntary contributors after 6 April 2014 and before 6 April 2015 needed **468 PRSI** paid contributions (9 years) 
  * People who became voluntary contributors after 6 April 2013 but before 6 April 2014 needed **364 PRSI** paid contributions (7 years) 

##  Rules

To be eligible to make voluntary contributions you must:

  * Have at least **520 PRSI** contributions paid under compulsory insurance in either employment or self-employment 
  * Apply to make your voluntary contribution within 60 months (5 years) of the end of the last completed tax year (contribution year) during which you last paid compulsory insurance or you were last awarded a credited contribution. (Since February 2017, the time limit for making voluntary contributions was extended from 12 months to 60 months.) 
  * Agree to pay voluntary contributions from the start of the contribution week that follows the week in which you leave compulsory insurance 

The contribution year is the same as the income tax year so it runs from
January to December.

You cannot use contributions paid in Class J to satisfy these conditions.
However, you may pay PRSI at Class J and voluntary contributions at the same
time.

You **stop paying voluntary contributions** when you start claiming a State
Pension or reach 70 years of age or start paying PRSI again.

##  Rates

There are three rates of voluntary contributions. The rate of voluntary
contribution you pay is linked to the last PRSI contribution paid or credited
by you. More information is available about [ paying social insurance
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-
insurance/) .

**If you paid PRSI at Class A, E or H you pay a high rate contribution of
6.6%** of your reckonable income in the previous tax year, subject to a
minimum payment of €500. The social insurance payments you may be entitled to
by making voluntary contributions at this rate are:

  * [ State Pension (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/)
  * [ Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-contrib-pension/)
  * [ Guardian’s Payment (Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/)

**If you paid PRSI at Class B, C or D you pay a low rate contribution of
2.6%** of your reckonable income in the previous tax year, subject to a
minimum payment of €250. The social insurance payments you may be entitled to
by making voluntary contributions at this rate are:

  * Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension 
  * Guardian’s Payment (Contributory) 

**If you paid PRSI at Class S you pay a special flat rate of €500.** The
social insurance payments you may be entitled to by making voluntary
contributions at this rate are:

  * State Pension (Contributory) 
  * Widow’s, Widower’s or Surviving Civil Partner's (Contributory) Pension 
  * Guardian’s Payment (Contributory) 

You can pay voluntary contributions by cheque, banker’s draft or standing
order. Your contribution can be paid as a lump sum before the end of the
contribution year or by quarterly or half-yearly instalments during the
contribution year. You must pay the full contribution for a year no later than
12 months after the end of the year in which the payment is due.

##  How to apply

To become a [ voluntary contributor you must download and complete application
form VC 1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/38579/05744c80b36743c7a5c7e420fa5f7a13.pdf) .

You can also get this form from your [ Intreo centre or social welfare local
office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) .  

##  Where to apply

###  Client Eligibility Services

Department of Social Protection,  
McCarter's Road,  
Buncrana,  
Donegal,  
Co. Donegal,  
F93 CH79

**Tel:** (01) 471 5898 or 0818 690690

**Homepage:** [
https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/fb84c0-intreo/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/intreo/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/fb84c0-intreo/?referrer=http://www.gov.ie/intreo/)

**Email:** [ contributionstatement@welfare.ie
](mailto:contributionstatement@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 7 August 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-
contributions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Voluntary%20social%20insurance%20contributions&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-
contributions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-
contributions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Voluntary%20social%20insurance%20contributions&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/voluntary-prsi-
contributions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Credited social insurance contributions_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/)

A credited social insurance contribution is a contribution given to you and
recorded on your social insurance record. This page explains the rules on
credited contributions for students, carers, homemakers, voluntary development
workers and people who retire early.

2360.984

  * [ _Combining social insurance contributions from abroad_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-insurance-contributions-from-abroad/)

Combining social insurance contributions paid in Ireland and abroad can help
you qualify for a social welfare payment. Find out more.

2290.2395

  * [ _Voluntary work and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/voluntary-work-and-social-welfare-payments/)

If you want to keep your social welfare payment and do some voluntary work,
you must follow the rules set down by the Department of Social Protection.

1856.812

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

