**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Disability and illness payments ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/)
> Domiciliary Care Allowance

#  Domiciliary Care Allowance

  * What is the Domiciliary Care Allowance? 
  * How to qualify for Domiciliary Care Allowance 
  * How much is Domiciliary Care Allowance? 
  * How to apply for Domiciliary Care Allowance 
  * What happens when my child reaches 16? 
  * More information 

##  What is the Domiciliary Care Allowance?

Domiciliary Care Allowance (DCA) is a monthly payment for a child aged under
16 with a _severe_ disability.

DCA is not means-tested, so you may qualify for it regardless of your income.

DCA is not based on the type of disability your child has. Instead, it is
based on their level of physical or mental impairment. Your child must need
ongoing care and attention, _substantially_ over and above what is usually
needed by a child of the same age.

You can read more about what _severe_ or _substantially_ means in the [ DCA
Medical Guidelines (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/37034/fdb0f1b14efd46d894d807c136128fdc.pdf) . The
Department of Social Protection (DSP) uses these guidelines when assessing
applications for DCA.

###  **DCA medical card scheme**

All children getting DCA can get a [ medical card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/medical-card/) without a means test.

If your child does not already have a medical card or [ GP visit card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-
cards/gp-visit-cards/) , you can:

  * [ Register online ](https://www.sspcrs.ie/portal/free-gp-care-dca-web/pub) using the HSE website, or 
  * [ Download the HSE’s paper registration form (pdf) ](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/schemes/mc/dca/Final%20Version%20DCA%20Form.pdf)

If your child already has a medical card or GP visit card, you don’t need to
register.

##  How to qualify for Domiciliary Care Allowance

To get Domiciliary Care Allowance (DCA), your child must have a severe
disability that is likely to last for **at least a year** , and:

  * Be aged under 16 (see ‘What happens when my child reaches 16’ below) 
  * Live with the person getting the DCA for at least 5 days a week (there are some exceptions to this – see ‘Living at home’ below) 
  * Meet the medical criteria (see below) 
  * Be ordinarily resident in Ireland 

Also, the person getting DCA for the child must:

  * Provide for the care of the child 
  * Be [ habitually resident ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-assistance-payments/habitual-residence-condition/) in the State. 

###  **Medical criteria**

The law says to get Domiciliary Care Allowance, a child must have "a severe
disability requiring continual or continuous care and attention, substantially
in excess of the care and attention normally required by a child of the same
age".

This means your child’s eligibility for DCA is not based on the type of
disability or illness they have, but on the level of care and attention they
need as a result. They must need this care and attention for daily living and
for at least 12 months.

The Department's Medical Assessor looks at the following information before
deciding on whether your child meets the medical criteria:

  * The history of the case 
  * All medical reports received (your GP fills out a medical report, and you should include reports from any relevant specialists) 
  * Your description of the care and attention needed by your child. (The application form lets you explain what extra care your child needs under a number of headings, such as personal care; communication; behaviour; safety; and sensory issues). 

###  **Living at home**

To qualify for DCA, the child must live at home with the person getting the
allowance for 5 or more days a week.

However, DCA may be paid where:

####  **Parents are living apart**

DCA may be paid where parents share the full-time care of their disabled
child, but live apart. For example, where separated parents have joint
custody, but the child doesn’t live with either parent for the required 5
continuous days each week.

In this case, DCA is paid to the parent who is nominated in writing by both
parents, or to the parent who is getting Child Benefit for the child.

####  **Child attends residential care**

You may get a half-rate DCA payment if your child is in residential care and
goes home for 2 days or more a week. For example, a child who attends
residential services from Monday to Friday and goes home at weekends.

Children who are being cared for on a full-time basis in residential homes or
other institutions are not eligible for DCA.

##  How much is Domiciliary Care Allowance?

The Domiciliary Care Allowance (DCA) rate is €340 per month.

You will get your DCA payment on the third Tuesday of every month for the
current month.

###  **Caring for more than one child**

There is no limit to the number of children for whom you can claim DCA. This
means, if you are caring for more than one child who qualifies for DCA, you
can get the monthly allowance for each child.

###  **Hospital stays**

You can continue getting DCA for **up to 26 weeks, in a period of** **12
months** , if your child is in hospital getting medical treatment (or other
treatment) of a temporary nature.

If your baby stays in hospital for medical treatment immediately after their
birth, you can get DCA for **up to 18 months** while they are in hospital.
This applies to babies born on or after 1 January 2023 only.

###  **Other payments**

You can get [ Child Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) with Domiciliary Care Allowance.

You can also get the annual [ Carer's Support Grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-support-
grant/) , which is paid automatically in June.

You may qualify for [ Carer's Benefit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-benefit/)
or [ Carer's Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) if you meet the criteria for these payments.
If you are getting DCA, you don’t need to fill in the medical report part of
the form when applying for Carer's Allowance.

##  How to apply for Domiciliary Care Allowance

To apply, fill in a [ Domiciliary Care Allowance application form (Dom Care 1)
(pdf) ](https://assets.gov.ie/10305/1744b043a96944af8afc9af0498bd8b8.pdf) .

If you can’t download the application form, you can:

  * [ Have the form posted to you by ](https://www.eforms.gov.ie/en/forms/1) the Department of Social Protection 
  * Collect a copy from your local [ Intreo Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Intreo-Centres-and-Local-and-Branch-Offices.aspx) , or local Citizens Information Centre 

You should complete Parts 1 to 5 of the form.

Your child’s GP or specialist should fill in parts 6 and 7 (the medical
report) of the form.

Include any reports and other information about your child’s disability, and
the impact it has on their care needs.

###  **Optional extra medical form**

If your child has a Pervasive Developmental Disorder (PDD) _,_ you can ask the
medical professional (or specialist dealing with your child) to complete an
additional medical form called [ DomCare3 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/10306/3dcf07b69a9244868f43232976408830.pdf) .

PDD refers to disorders characterised by delays in the development of social
and communication skills. It includes:

  * Autism 
  * Asperger’s Syndrome 
  * Childhood Disintegrative Disorder 
  * Rett’s Syndrome 

This form is optional, because medical professionals may have already given a
detailed report on your child’s medical condition and care needs. However, if
you do not have a recent report from your child’s medical professional, the
DomCare3 form can be useful.

The completed form will:

  * Explain your child’s conditions 
  * Cover any specific care needs your child might have as a result of their disability 
  * Help the Department’s medical assessor decide on eligibility. 

###  **Appeals**

If your application is refused, you can [ appeal the decision
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/) to the independent Social Welfare Appeals
Office. You must appeal within 21 days of getting the decision.

##  What happens when my child reaches 16?

DCA stops when your child reaches 16, so your last DCA payment will be for the
month of their 16th birthday.

The Department of Social Protection will write to you 3 months before your
child’s 16th birthday to remind you that DCA will soon stop and tell you about
the available options.

###  **Disability Allowance**

At age 16, your child can apply in their own right for [ Disability Allowance
(DA) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/disability-and-
illness/disability-allowance/) . DA is a means-tested payment for people with
disabilities who, as a result of their disability, are substantially
restricted in undertaking work that would otherwise be suitable for a person
of their age, experience and qualifications.

The qualifying conditions for DA are different from the qualifying conditions
for DCA, so your child is not automatically entitled to DA because they were
getting DCA. The means test for Disability Allowance assesses the means of
your child, and your income is **not** taken into account.

Your child should apply a few months before they turn 16, to allow time for
their application to be processed.

###  **Carer’s Allowance**

Your entitlement to a Carer's Allowance will only be stopped where, on review,
it is decided that your child no longer needs full-time care and attention.
Your Carer’s Allowance may be reviewed at any time to make sure you continue
to meet the criteria.

##  More information

You can visit your [ local Citizens Information Centre
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) , Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office to speak with someone about your entitlements.

Send your [ Domiciliary Care Allowance application form (Dom Care 1) (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/10305/1744b043a96944af8afc9af0498bd8b8.pdf) and
supporting documentation to:

###  Domiciliary Care Allowance

Social Welfare Services Office  
Government Buildings  
Ballinalee Road  
Longford  
N39 E4E0

**Tel:** 0818 927 770

**Homepage:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/service/30fac9-domiciliary-care-
allowance/ ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/30fac9-domiciliary-care-allowance/)

**Email:** [ domcare@welfare.ie ](mailto:domcare@welfare.ie)

_**Page edited:** 26 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Domiciliary%20Care%20Allowance&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Domiciliary%20Care%20Allowance&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/disability-and-illness/domiciliary-care-
allowance/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Carer's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/)

Carer's Allowance is a weekly social welfare payment to people who are caring
for a person who needs support because of their age, disability or illness
(including mental illness).

1728.7415

  * [ _Half-rate Carer's Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/)

Half-rate Carer's Allowance is payable with certain other social welfare
payments provided you meet the qualifying criteria. Find out how to qualify
for half-rate Carer's Allowance.

1547.7745

  * [ _Disability Allowance_ ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/)

A weekly payment to people that have an injury, illness or disability which is
expected to last more than a year. Find out how to qualify and rates of
payment.

1222.8927

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

