**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Social welfare payments and work ](/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments-
and-work/) > Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme

#  Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

The Part-Time Job Incentive (PTJI) Scheme allows certain people getting
Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) to take up part-time work and get a special weekly
allowance instead of their jobseeker’s payment. It is intended to be a
stepping stone to full-time work. You must be available for and seeking full-
time work while you are on the Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme.

##  Rules

You can participate in the PTJI Scheme if you get part-time work for less than
24 hours per week and immediately before that you were:

  * On long-term [ Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) for at least 390 days (15 months). Days of unemployment on [ Jobseeker's Benefit (JB) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) or the [ Covid-19 Pandemic Unemployment Payment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/covid19-pandemic-unemployment-payment/) count towards the 390 days if you were getting JB immediately before you got Jobseeker’s Allowance. 
  * Getting a weekly JA payment of at least €147 if you are single or €239.70 if you are getting an increase for a qualified adult. 

You must also undertake to remain on the scheme for 2 months. You can do more
than one part-time job but the total hours worked must be less than 24. The
part-time job you get must be likely to last at least 2 months and be
insurable at [ PRSI Class A or J ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/social-insurance-classes/) . If you get full-time
work you may not return to the PTJI Scheme at the end of your full-time work
no matter how short it was. Self-employed people are not eligible for this
scheme.

###  Duration of payment

Initially, you can stay on the PTJI scheme for one year. This may be extended
for a further period. While on the scheme, you must continue to look for full-
time work.

##  Rates

Instead of your usual payment, you will get a weekly allowance of:

  * €147 per week if you are single 
  * €239.70 per week if you are getting an increase for a qualified adult 

There are no increases in these rates for qualified children. The allowance is
paid regardless of how much you earn in your job. The allowance is not
taxable. However, your wages will be taxable in the usual way.

##  How to apply

Once you have secured the part-time job, you should contact your [ Intreo
Centre or local Social Welfare Branch Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/) to apply
for the PTJI scheme.

You will be asked to complete the application form [ PTJI1 (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/37574/6a9dc8037f234e24899f5034d8d85501.pdf) and give
details of your part-time employment.

Your employer has to complete form PTJI2 at the end of each 4-week period to
confirm the hours that you worked and that you are insurably employed. You
must sign a declaration (using the same form) confirming that you worked less
than 24 hours each week. You must return this form to your Intreo Centre or
Social Welfare Branch Office. If there is any delay in returning this form,
payment is suspended until the form is received. Payment is made weekly by
EFT.

If your job ends or you finish the PTJI you may re-qualify for long-term
Jobseeker’s Allowance as long as there is no change in your circumstances
(other than finishing the part-time job). Alternatively, you may qualify for
Jobseeker’s Benefit if you have enough PRSI contributions.

###  Secondary benefits

No secondary benefits are paid while you are on the Part-Time Job Incentive
scheme. You can keep your medical card while you are on the PTJI scheme
regardless of your earnings for a maximum of 3 years. You can continue to
qualify for [ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/rent-supplement/) but your earnings will be assessed against your
supplement.

###  Appeals

The Part-Time Job Incentive scheme is a non-statutory scheme and you cannot
appeal a decision to the Social Welfare Appeals Office. If you are not happy
with a decision on the scheme you can appeal to the Officer in charge of the
Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme at your local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office.

##  Where to apply

You can apply for the Part-Time Job Incentive Scheme to your [ local Intreo
Centre or Social Welfare Branch Office.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/)

_**Page edited:** 8 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Part-
Time%20Job%20Incentive%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Part-
Time%20Job%20Incentive%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-
scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Part-time fee scheme for undergraduate courses_ ](/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-courses/)

The part-time fee scheme is a financial support scheme for students studying
certain part-time undergraduate courses in Ireland and abroad.

2267.3916

  * [ _Rights of part-time workers_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/rights-of-part-time-workers/)

Find out about part-time workers' rights under the Protection of Employees
(Part-Time Work) Act 2001.

2116.7893

  * [ _Part-time work and social insurance (PRSI)_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-time-work-and-social-insurance-prsi/)

This page explains how part-time work can affect your PRSI contributions.

2092.828

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

