**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Social Welfare ](/en/social-welfare/) > [
Irish social welfare system ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/)
> [ Claiming a social welfare payment ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/) > Applying for social
welfare payments and services online

#  Applying for social welfare payments and services online

  * Can I apply for a social welfare payment online? 
  * Accessing MyWelfare online services 
  * Setting up a basic MyGovID account 
  * Setting up a verified MyGovID account 
  * More information about online social welfare services 

##  Can I apply for a social welfare payment online?

You can apply online for many social welfare payments using the [ MyWelfare
website ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/) .

For example, you can apply online for:

  * [ Jobseeker’s payments ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/)
  * [ Illness Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/)
  * [ Paternity Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/paternity-benefit/)
  * [ Maternity Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/maternity-benefit/)
  * [ Child Benefit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/child-benefit/)
  * [ PRSI refunds ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/5706e5-prsi-refunds/)

If needed, you can also [ upload your supporting documents using MyWelfare
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/4d9f8-how-to-upload-documents-on-
mywelfare/) .

###  **Other online social welfare services**

You can also use the MyWelfare website to:

  * Make appointments for a Personal Public Service number, or a Public Services Card 
  * Update your address details 
  * Update your bank details 
  * Request a payment statement or a contribution statement 
  * Close a jobseeker’s claim 
  * Request a jobseeker’s holiday 
  * Send work and skills information to your case officer 
  * Check your eligibility for dental and optical benefits 
  * See how taking up employment may affect your social welfare payment (using the ‘ [ Benefit of Work Estimator ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/out-of-work-payments/benefit-of-work-estimator/) ’) 

You can also use [ the pension calculation tool
](https://pensionsauthority.ie/lifecycle/useful-resources/pension-calculator/)
on the Pensions Authority website.

##  Accessing MyWelfare online services

To use MyWelfare online services, you must create a [ MyGovID account
](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp) . This is a secure online
identity-verification service.

Your MyGovID account lets you access a range of government services online, as
well as social welfare services.

There are 2 types of MyGovID account:

  * A basic MyGovID account 
  * A verified MyGovID account 

##  Setting up a basic MyGovID account

A [ basic MyGovID account ](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp) lets
you access services like:

  * Booking appointments online for a PPS number and Public Services Card 
  * Request a statement of your PRSI contributions. 

To create your basic MyGovID account, you should:

  1. Visit [ MyGovID.ie ](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp)
  2. Enter your email address, create a password and click ‘Register now’ 
  3. A code will be sent to your email address, which you must enter on-screen to complete your basic account registration. 

Once you have activated your MyGovID account, you can log into your basic
account. You will see a list of online services, including MyWelfare services.

You can also log directly into MyWelfare using your MyGovID.

##  Setting up a verified MyGovID account

A [ verified MyGovID account ](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp) is
more secure than a basic account. It lets you access all available services.

You can upgrade from a basic account to a verified MyGovID account at [
MyGovID.ie ](https://www.mygovid.ie/) or you can download the [ MyGovID app
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f61b1-mygovid-app/) onto your smartphone.

To upgrade from a basic account to a verified MyGovID, you need:

  * A [ Personal Public Service (PPS) number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/)
  * A [ Public Services Card (PSC) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/) , and 
  * A verified mobile phone that can receive text messages. If your phone is not yet verified by the Department of Social Protection, you can call them on 0818 927 999. 

If you do not have a PSC, you can apply:

  * Using the [ MyGovID app ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/f61b1-mygovid-app/)
  * [ In-person ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fd52ab-public-services-card/#your-safe-registration-appointment) at a [ PSC Centre ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/be29c7-psc-online-registration-centres/)

If you do not have a PPS number, you will need to apply for your PPS number at
a designated [ PPS Number Allocation Centre
](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Personal-Public-Service-Number-Registration-
Centres-by-Count.aspx) .

Every time you access your verified MyGovID account, you will be asked to
enter a verification code which has been sent to your mobile phone. This
2-step authentication process makes your account more secure.

Once you have a verified account, you can apply for social welfare payments
online. In some cases, you must be invited by the Department of Social
Protection to apply online.

##  More information about online social welfare services

Visit [ MyWelfare.ie ](http://services.mywelfare.ie/) to access social welfare
services and payments online.

###  **I don’t have access to the Internet**

If you don’t have internet access, you can continue to apply for social
welfare payments as normal. MyWelfare is just another way to access services,
apply for benefits, or amend your jobseeker’s details.

You can find information about how to apply for social welfare payments by
searching for the payment on our website.

You may also want to contact:

  * [ Your local Intreo Centre or branch office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/)
  * [ Your local Citizens Information Centre ](https://centres.citizensinformation.ie/)

_**Page edited:** 10 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-
online/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Applying%20for%20social%20welfare%20payments%20and%20services%20online&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-
online/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-
online/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Applying%20for%20social%20welfare%20payments%20and%20services%20online&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-
payment/applying-for-social-welfare-payments-and-services-
online/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Pregnancy and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/pregnancy-and-social-welfare-payments/)

This page explains how pregnancy may affect your social welfare payment. You
may be entitled to a different payment or an increase in your current payment.

2473.5137

  * [ _Social welfare payments and the student grant_ ](/en/social-welfare/back-to-education/social-welfare-payments-and-the-student-grant/)

Information on claiming a social welfare payment, BTEA and the student grant.

2453.3252

  * [ _Capital and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/how-to-assess-your-means-from-capital-for-social-welfare-payments/)

Capital for Irish social welfare purposes includes property, savings and
investments. Find out how to assess income from capital for social welfare
payments.

2402.0112

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

