**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Public transport ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-
transport/) > Luas tram system

#  Luas tram system

  * Introduction 
  * How Luas works 
  * Luas services for passengers with disabilities 
  * Tickets 
  * Park and ride facilities 
  * Luas Byelaws and passenger guidelines 
  * Contact information 

##  Introduction

Luas is a public transport tram system that operates in Dublin, Ireland. The
name Luas is the Irish word for speed. This tram system connects suburban
parts of Dublin on 2 tramlines running through the city centre. These
tramlines are:

  * The Green Line: connecting Bride’s Glen (on the south side of the city) to Broombridge (on the north side) 
  * The Red Line: connecting Saggart and Tallaght (on the southwestern side of Dublin) to The Point in Dublin Docklands 

View the [ Luas network map ](https://luas.ie/assets/files/LCC Network Map.2
2017.jpg) on luas.ie. You can use the [ Dublin Bus Route Planner
](https://www.transportforireland.ie/plan-a-journey/) to link your Dublin Bus
and Dart journeys to the Luas. There is a [ list of frequently asked questions
on luas.ie ](https://luas.ie/faq/) .

**Fares on public transport**

[ The 20% reduction of public transport fares will continue for most services
in 2024 ](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/5c270-budget-2024-to-deliver-
further-reductions-in-fares-and-introduce-new-services-for-families-and-
commuters/) . The 50% price reduction on Young Adult Leap Card will continue
in 2024. You can see the [ National Transport Authority Fare (NTA) Plan 2024
](https://www.nationaltransport.ie/news/nta-publishes-fares-plan/) .

From [ 23 June 2024 there are fare increases
](https://www.nationaltransport.ie/news/first-phase-of-2024-fares-
determination-to-take-effect-from-23rd-june/) on some services.

###

##  How Luas works

###  Operating hours and frequency

Operating hours vary by stop and direction of service. You can view [ Luas
operating hours ](https://www.luas.ie/operating-hours.html) and [ Luas
frequency ](https://luas.ie/times/) on luas.ie.

There are electronic displays telling you the time of the next tram at every
Luas stop. In addition, there are electronic displays and announcements
informing passengers of the next stop on board every tram.

Special services operate during Christmas, New Year and on other occasions.

###

##  Luas services for passengers with disabilities

All Luas trams and stops are wheelchair-accessible and there are designated
parking spaces for people with disabilities. Each tram makes audio
announcements and has electronic displays so you can tell where you are on
your journey. You may bring your [ guide dog ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/transport-and-disability/mobility-training-for-people-with-a-
visual-impairment/) on board Luas trams. You can read more about [ travelling
on public transport with a disability or reduced mobility ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/travelling-publictransport-with-disability/) .

##  Tickets

Ticket vending machines are located at every Luas stop. You must have a valid
ticket before boarding the tram. You can use your [ Leap Card
](https://www.leapcard.ie/Home/index.html) , which you can top it up at the
vending machines.

Your ticket must be valid in all Luas zones you travel in. If you are using a
Leap card, you must validate it at the beginning and end of your journey using
the validator on the platform. Read the [ Leap Card FAQS
](https://about.leapcard.ie/faqs) for more information.

The cost of your ticket will depend on the number of zones your journey
covers. You can calculate the cost of your Luas journey in advance using the
online [ fare calculator ](https://www.luas.ie/fare-calculator.php) .

You can see a [ guide to the different types of Luas tickets
](https://www.luas.ie/ticket-types.html) and view a [ summary list of fares
(pdf) ](https://luas.ie/assets/files/Luas Summary Fares Sheet_Valid from Fri
1st Dec 2017_4.pdf) on luas.ie. If you are an adult, you must carry a Luas or
Dublin Bus photo identity card to use certain types of ticket.

The [ Young Adult and Student Leap Cards ](https://about.leapcard.ie/young-
adult-and-student-card-
launch?gclid=CjwKCAjw4c-ZBhAEEiwAZ105RQkk2Mk-w9maaqQyMg3yB-E86D1ULMgi4oWygt3DVj30G-mLPKoabxoCmxEQAvD_BwE)
allow students to get discounted fares on Iarnród Eireann, Luas and Dublin Bus
services. It is only available to full-time students in second-level and
third-level education.

The [ TFI-90 fare ](https://www.transportforireland.ie/tfi-90-minute-
fare/#:~:text=Travel%20more%20in%20the%20Dublin,and%2065%20cent%20for%20children.)
allows free transfers between Dublin Bus, Luas, DART, commuter rail, and Go-
Ahead Ireland services. The fare applies to most journeys in the Dublin area
involving multiple services within 90 minutes or a single trip.

You may travel free on Luas if you have a [ Free Travel Pass ](/en/social-
welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) .

If you have a Free Travel Pass, you do not need to get a ticket for Luas.
However, you must produce your pass on the tram if requested by a Luas
Customer Service Officer or Inspector. Inspectors are entitled to check that
the pass is valid. They may look for supporting documentation and check with
the Department of Social Protection to ensure the pass is being used by the
correct person.

Children under 5 travel free on Luas but must be with a [ paying passenger
](https://luas.ie/faq/) . Children aged 5–15 pay the child fare.

Luas is part of the [ TaxSaver Commuter Scheme ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/public-transport-commuter-tickets-and-tax/) .
There is [ more information on tax saver tickets on luas.ie
](http://taxsavertickets.luas.ie/) .

##  Park and ride facilities

Car parking is available at certain Luas stops. You pay for parking before
boarding the tram or by using [ ParkByText ](http://www.parkbytext.ie/) . If
you do not have a Luas ticket valid for travel on the day you park at a Luas
stop, you will have to pay an additional charge when you leave the car park.

[ More information on park and ride services and facilities
](https://luas.ie/car-parking/) is available on luas.ie.

[ Bicycle parking ](https://luas.ie/bike-parking.html) is available at most
Luas stops. The only bicycles permitted on the tram are folding bicycles
stored in a carrier bag.

##  Luas Byelaws and passenger guidelines

###  Ticket rules and fines

[ Luas Byelaws ](https://www.luas.ie/luas-byelaws.html) regulate the use of
Luas.

Passengers must have a valid ticket for their journey. Passengers without a
valid ticket will be issued with a Standard Fare Notice (SFN) and charged a
standard fare of €45. You must pay within 14 days. The fine amount increases
to €100 if it is not paid within 28 days. (see Byelaws). If you fail to pay
this standard fare, you may be prosecuted.

###  **The payment process for Standard Fare**

You can [ pay the Standard Fare on luas.ie ](https://payment.luas.ie/) . You
need a standard fare number and a reference number.

###  **How can I appeal a Standard Fare Notice?**

If you want to appeal a Standard Fare Notice, you can [ submit a statement of
explanation ](https://appeal.luas.ie/) on the Luas website. You must do this
within 14 days of the date you received the notice.

###  **Boarding etiquette**

When boarding the tram, you should wait for people to get off before you get
on. Wait until the tram has left the stop before crossing the tracks. Cross at
the designated crossing points and always look both ways for approaching
trams.

###  **Priority seating**

Seats that are reserved for older people, pregnant women and passengers with
special needs should be made available to them.

###  **Prohibited activities**

You are not allowed to eat, drink or smoke on a Luas. Animals are not allowed
on board except for guide dogs.

###  **Report anti-social behaviour on the Luas**

You can [ report anti-social behaviour on the Luas ](https://luas.ie/report-
anti-social-behaviour-on-
luas.html#:~:text=For%20safety%2Drelated%20incidents%20or%20tram%20emergencies%2C%20always%20call%20999.&text=Text%20the%20keyword%20%E2%80%9CLUAS%E2%80%9D%2C,%2Dsocial%20behaviour%2C%20to%2051444.)
in the following ways:

  * Luas Text SMS Service - text “LUAS”, along with your report of anti-social behaviour, to 51444. You will have to pay standard rates for any text you send 
  * Luas App for free by using the “Report” button 
  * Luas WhatsApp messaging service for free - add 087 055 5715 to your contacts 

##  Contact information

If you have questions or feedback or want to complain, you can contact the
Luas customer services team by email, phone, or post.

###  Luas

Luas Depot  
Red Cow  
Clondalkin  
Dublin 22  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** (Monday to Friday, 7am to 7pm and Saturday, 8am to 6pm)

**Tel:** 01 4614910 or 0818 300 604

**Homepage:** [ http://www.luas.ie ](http://www.luas.ie)

**Email:** [ info@luas.ie ](mailto:info@luas.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/public-transport/luas/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Luas%20tram%20system&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/public-transport/luas/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/luas/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Luas%20tram%20system&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/public-transport/luas/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Children and the care system_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/children-and-the-care-system/)

Overview of the child care system in Ireland. What are the different types of
court orders?

637.34174

  * [ _Overview of the Irish education system_ ](/en/education/the-irish-education-system/overview-of-the-irish-education-system/)

The Irish education system is made up of first, second and third-level
education and of further education. Almost all education is funded by the
State.

623.6001

  * [ _Children and the criminal justice system_ ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/children-and-the-criminal-justice-system-in-ireland/)

The Children Act 2001 regulates the treatment of children found in breach of
the criminal law.

552.7915

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

