**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Driver
licensing ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/) >
International Driving Permit

#  International Driving Permit

  * What is an International Driving Permit? 
  * Where can I use my International Driving Permit? 
  * Who can apply 
  * How much does it cost 
  * How to apply 
  * How long will it take to get my International Driving Permit? 
  * Where to apply 

##  What is an International Driving Permit?

An international driving permit is a translation of your driving licence that
allows you to drive in countries outside of the EU/EEA. You should carry your
driving licence with it when driving. It is valid for one year. You apply to
the AA for an international driving permit.

There are two types of international driving permit issued in Ireland:

  * A 1949 Convention International Driving Permit, which is the most commonly issued driving permit and is recognised in most countries. 
  * A 1926 Convention International Driving Permit, which is required for the following countries - Brazil, Burundi, Iraq, Nigeria and Somalia. 

##  Where can I use my International Driving Permit?

You can use your international driving permit in any of the countries that
have signed the 1926 or 1949 UN Convention on road traffic. See the [
application form (pdf) ](https://www.theaa.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2023/11/AA_IDP-Application202310-1.pdf) for a list of
countries that recognise the permit.

Many other countries that are not signatories to the 1949 convention recognise
the international driving permit and accept it. You should contact your
embassy or consulate in advance of travelling to confirm if it is recognized
by them.

##  Who can apply

It is available to Irish residents, who have a current full Irish driving
licence and to all EU/EEA licence holders who are resident in Ireland.

You cannot get an international driving permit in Ireland if:

  * You have not passed your driving test and have a learner permit 
  * Your driving licence is due to expire within 6 months 

You should always carry your own driving permit (even if you have an
international driving permit) when travelling abroad. You may need to produce
this licence for inspection, for example, when hiring a car abroad.

Each international driving permit is valid for one year from the date of
issue.

##  How much does it cost

An international driving permit (valid for 1 year) costs €15 for express
service). (Includes a €5 admin/postal delivery charge per permit).

The standard service costs €10.

##  How to apply

You can [ download an application form for an international driving permit
(pdf) ](https://www.theaa.ie/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/AA_IDP-
Application202310-1.pdf) . A copy of the form is also available from AA Travel
Services. You use the same form if you are renewing your permit.

Your application must include the following:

  * A copy of your current valid Irish driving licence (front and back) 
  * A passport sized photograph signed on the back 
  * The fee of €15.00 (express service) payable by cheque or postal order to the AA or by credit or debit card, Google Pay or Apple Pay 
  * A copy of a household bill dated in the last 3 months (If applying with a non-Irish driving licence) 

More information on international driving permits is available on the [ AA
website ](http://www.theaa.ie/AA/Motoring-advice/Driving-in-
Europe/International-driving-permit.aspx) .

##  How long will it take to get my International Driving Permit?

If you use the express service (€15), you will get your application within 7
working days, and it is returned to you by normal post.

If you use the standard service (€10), you will get your application within 10
working days.

If you are applying from outside of Ireland, allow an extra 5 working days.
This is in case of international postage delays.

##  Where to apply

Send your completed application form by post in a sealed envelope to: **AA
Travel Services, P.O. Box 11331, Dublin 2.**

If you are looking for a copy of the form or if you need to contact AA Travel
Services, you can contact them at:

###  AA Travel Services

AA Ireland  
Floor 3  
80 Harcourt Street  
Dublin 2  
D02 F449  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 617 9988

**Locall:** 0818 227 228

**Homepage:** [ https://www.theaa.ie/ ](https://www.theaa.ie/)

**Email:** [ service@theaa.ie ](mailto:service@theaa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 31 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/international-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=International%20Driving%20Permit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/international-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/international-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=International%20Driving%20Permit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/international-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Updating your personal details on your driving licence or learner permit_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/updating-your-driving-licence-or-learner-permit/)

If you change your name or address, you can exchange your current driving
licence or learner permit for an updated one.

2404.523

  * [ _Replacing a lost, stolen or damaged driving licence or learner permit_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/replacing-a-lost-or-stolen-irish-driving-licence/)

If you have lost or had your most recent driving licence or learner permit
stolen, but is still valid, you can get a replacement.

2028.712

  * [ _How your international protection application is assessed_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/how-refugee-applications-commissioner-deals-with-applications/)

An outline of how applications for international protection in Ireland are
assessed and examined.

1732.2675

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

