**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Driving
offences ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/) > Reporting
stolen vehicles

#  Reporting stolen vehicles

  * How to report a stolen vehicle 
  * How to prevent your car from being stolen 
  * More information 

##  How to report a stolen vehicle

Every day cars are stolen from their owners. A car can sometimes be stolen
because of carelessness on the part of the owner, for example, by leaving your
vehicle unlocked or unattended in public places.

If your vehicle is stolen, you should report this to the Gardaí immediately
and call your insurance company. You can find the location of your nearest
Garda Station on [ Garda.ie ](http://www.garda.ie/Stations/Default.aspx) .

Vehicles reported as stolen are entered into a central database that all Garda
stations in Ireland can access. Vehicles reported as stolen can be monitored
and tracked by the Gardaí across the country.

###  Call your insurance company

Your insurance company will tell you how to make an insurance claim.

##  How to prevent your car from being stolen

It's important to be aware of the potential risks when you leave your vehicle
unattended (for even a few moments) in a public place. It's also important to
be mindful of parking, particularly when you park in daylight but return much
later in darkness.

These are some general safety tips and way to prevent your car from being
stolen:

  * Park in a well-lit area if possible 
  * Make sure your car is locked and your car alarm is switched on, or use a steering lock 
  * Do not leave valuables inside the car 
  * Never leave your car running and unattended 
  * Store your keys safely, away from windows and letterboxes in your home 

###

##  More information

###

If you are buying a second hand car, and want to find out about the things you
should check beforehand, read our page about [ buying a used car
](/en/consumer/cars/buying-a-used-car/) .

_**Page edited:** 21 November 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/stolen-
vehicles/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Reporting%20stolen%20vehicles&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/stolen-
vehicles/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/stolen-
vehicles/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Reporting%20stolen%20vehicles&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/stolen-
vehicles/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Categories of motor vehicles and minimum age of drivers_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/)

Motor vehicles in Ireland are divided into different categories for driver
licensing purposes. Information is provide on categories of vehicles and the
minimum age you need to be in order to legally drive them.

924.8829

  * [ _Quad bikes and all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/quad-bikes-and-all-terrain-vehicles-atvs-in-ireland/)

Find out about driving a quad on a public road. Anyone driving a quad must
complete mandatory training and wear a certain type of helmet for their
safety.

845.1812

  * [ _Electric vehicles_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/electric-vehicles/)

This page gives an overview of some of the grant supports and information
available for electric vehicle owners and buyers.

821.0831

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

