**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Vehicle standards ](/en/travel-and-recreation/vehicle-
standards/) > Vehicle registration plates

#  Vehicle registration plates

  * Introduction 
  * Rules for car registration plates 
  * Cost for reserving a car registration plate 
  * How to reserve a car registration plate 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

In Ireland, there are strict rules about the format, dimensions and technical
specifications of vehicle registration plates that are displayed on vehicles.
Failure to have a registration plate that conforms to these standards can
result in a fine.

##  Rules for car registration plates

The rules dealing with vehicle registration plates can be found in [ SI 318/92
Vehicle Registration and Taxation Regulations 1992
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1992/en/si/0318.html) , as amended. This law
outlines the format, dimensions and technical specifications that must be
displayed on registered vehicles.

The main requirements on the format of vehicle registration plates are:

  * The registration number, which consists of numbers and letters, must be in black on a white reflective background. 
  * The name of the county of registration must be in Irish, (for example, Baile Átha Cliath). 
  * The EU flag and the letters "IRL" must be placed on the left-hand side of the plate. The flag shows 12 gold stars in a circle, with the letters "IRL" in white underneath it, all on a blue reflective background. 
  * No other numbers, letters, or marks, should appear on your registration plate. 

There have been 2 registration periods every year. These registration plates
have a separate 3-digit year identifier for the first and second 6-month
period of the year, for example, 241 and 242 respectively.

You can view [ images of acceptable vehicle registration plates
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-allowances/guide-to-
vrt/vehicle-registration-tax/registration-plate-standards.aspx) .

Vehicle registration plates must be fixed to the front and rear of your
vehicle and be clearly visible at all times. If you tow a trailer or caravan,
a duplicate of the registration plate must be fixed to the back of the trailer
or caravan.

Vehicles with only 1 front wheel (motorcycles) only need a registration plate
on the rear of the vehicle.

###  Reserving a vehicle registration number

You can apply to reserve a vehicle registration number plate on or after 1
November of the year before you intend to bring the vehicle into use. In other
words, you can only apply to reserve a vehicle registration number plate on or
after 1 November 2024 to use this plate in 2025.

The number you reserve must:

  * Be in the normal format 
  * Correspond with the licensing authority area where you live 
  * Show the year and half year in which the vehicle is to be first brought into use 

For example, 242-D-111 can only be reserved by someone living in Dublin for a
vehicle intended to be brought into use in the second half of 2024.

The registered owner of the vehicle must be the person in whose name the
number was reserved. You cannot transfer a reserved number.

All registration numbers are available for reservation, apart from plates that
are reserved for the Mayor and Lord Mayor of Cork, Dublin, Limerick and
Waterford. These registration plates cannot be reserved:

  * 241-C-1 
  * 242-C-1 
  * 241-D-1 
  * 242-D-1 
  * 241-L-1 
  * 242-L-1 
  * 241-W-1 
  * 242-W-1 

A reserved registration number can only be assigned to a vehicle when it has
been reached in the normal sequence. It may not be displayed on a vehicle
before it has been formally assigned by the Revenue Commissioners following a
completed declaration for registration.

Applications will be processed on receipt on the first working day of
November.

No priority will be given to applications received before this date.

##  Cost for reserving a car registration plate

The fee to reserve a vehicle registration number is €1,000.

There is no fee for registration numbers issued normally, apart from the cost
of the number plate.

The Revenue Commissioners can fine you up to €5,000 for registration plates
that do not comply with the law.

##  How to reserve a car registration plate

Download and complete an [ application form VRT15A (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/vrt-15a.pdf) to reserve a registration number (one
form per registration number) and send it with the appropriate fee to the
National VRT Services (see 'Where to apply' below). You can also send it
through [ MyEnquiries ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-
services/services/manage-your-record/myenquiries.aspx) to the National VRT
Services in Revenue.

Successful applicants will be notified on Form VRT 15N, and you must present
this form when you are registering the vehicle.

If you are unsuccessful in your application, you will be notified by the
National VRT Services and your fee will be refunded.

If a successful applicant does not use the registration number within a
reasonable time, it will be cancelled. However, the fee will only be refunded
in exceptional circumstances.

##  Where to apply

###  Revenue Commissioners

National VRT Services  
Revenue Commissioners  
Anne Street  
Wexford  
Y35 E29K  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday-Friday, from 9.30am - 13.30pm

**Tel:** 01-7383619

_**Page edited:** 1 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/vehicle-standards/vehicle-registration-
numbers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Vehicle%20registration%20plates&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/vehicle-standards/vehicle-registration-
numbers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/vehicle-standards/vehicle-registration-
numbers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Vehicle%20registration%20plates&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/vehicle-standards/vehicle-registration-
numbers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Importing a vehicle into Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/importing-car-into-ireland/)

Find out how to import your car and other motor vehicles into Ireland, and if
you are liable to pay Vehicle Registration Tax (VRT).

1575.2794

  * [ _Registration of health and social care professionals_ ](/en/health/health-system/registration-of-health-and-social-care-professionals/)

Health and social care professionals are regulated by CORU. There is a process
for making complaints about the fitness to practice of registered
professionals.

1517.0529

  * [ _Categories of motor vehicles and minimum age of drivers_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/)

Motor vehicles in Ireland are divided into different categories for driver
licensing purposes. Information is provide on categories of vehicles and the
minimum age you need to be in order to legally drive them.

1464.3135

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

