**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Roads and safety ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-
safety/) > Safety advice for motorists

#  Safety advice for motorists

  * Before you drive 
  * When driving 
  * Crime prevention 
  * Further information 

##  Before you drive

Before you drive your car, there are certain documents that you must have in
place. You should also check that the car is safe to drive (roadworthy). Keep
up to date with the general maintenance of your car. When driving a car, be
aware of the way you drive, the dangers on the road and your obligations as a
road user.

**Before you drive you must ensure the following:**

  * The car is [ insured ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-insurance/motor-insurance/) and [ taxed ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-insurance/motor-tax-rates/) . 
  * The car has passed its [ NCT test ](/en/travel-and-recreation/vehicle-standards/national-car-test/) . 
  * All discs are displayed on the windscreen. 
  * You must also hold a valid [ driving licence ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/learner-driving-permits-for-cars-and-work-vehicles/) . 

Check all lights and indicators and ensure your windscreen is clean and free
from anything that might obstruct your vision. Keep your windscreen washer
fluid topped up. Check your horn is working. Check that the brakes are
working. You need to check regularly the brake and engine oil levels, the tyre
pressure and the condition of your tyres. Getting your car serviced when it’s
due is always a good idea. Check your car’s handbook for the next service
date.

##  When driving

You need to drive responsibly and follow the [ rules of the road
](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/resources/rules-of-the-road)
when driving.

**When driving you should:**

  * Drive at a speed appropriate to the road and weather conditions, the volume of traffic and the likelihood of hazards. Speed limits are the maximum speed you can drive on a stretch of road in good conditions. 
  * Never drink or take drugs and drive. Alcohol and drugs affect your judgement, vision, coordination, and reaction time. 
  * Wear your seatbelt. By law, every passenger in the car must also wear a seatbelt. 
  * Take a break from driving if you feel tired – a nap of 15 to 20 minutes can help. 
  * Never use a hand-held mobile phone. Any distraction when driving can be dangerous. 
  * Use your dipped headlights to see and be seen if visibility is poor. 
  * Only use fog lights when there is fog or falling snow. Switch them off when conditions improve. 

##  Crime prevention

Taking some basic precautions can help you avoid becoming a victim of crime
while driving.

  * Always lock your doors and keep your windows closed. 
  * Make sure your handbag and any valuables are kept out of sight. 
  * Carry all luggage or shopping in the boot and leave the back seat empty. 
  * Never leave jackets or coats hanging in the back seat as these can be stolen while your car is stopped in traffic. 
  * Use your horn if someone approaches your windows or a car seems to be trying to make you stop. 
  * Know your route in advance. You should carry a map or use a GPS and avoid having to ask for directions. On longer journeys, tell someone your route and when you expect to reach your destination. 
  * If you think you are being followed, drive into the car park of the nearest Garda station, or if that isn’t possible, drive to a busy public place, for example, a garage forecourt. 
  * Never give lifts to strangers. 

###  Safety while parking

You should choose a well-lit spot to park in. If you are parking in daylight
but returning much later, you should consider what the space will look like in
darkness. When returning to your car, you should have your keys in your hand
to avoid searching through a bag or coat.

##  Further information

You can find out more in our pages on [ safety advice for motorcyclists
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/buying-
or-selling-a-vehicle/owning-a-motorcycle-in-ireland/#l864e0) , [ seat belts
and the law ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-safety/seatbelts-when-
motoring-in-ireland/) and the national speed limits in Ireland. You can also [
find road safety information for motorists, pedestrians and cyclists on the
website of An Garda Síochána ](https://www.garda.ie/en/roads-policing/road-
safety/) . The [ Road Safety Authority (RSA) ](https://www.rsa.ie/en/) is
another resource.

_**Page edited:** 9 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/safety-advice-for-
motorists/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Safety%20advice%20for%20motorists&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/safety-advice-for-
motorists/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/roads-and-safety/safety-advice-for-
motorists/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Safety%20advice%20for%20motorists&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/safety-advice-for-
motorists/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Civil legal aid and legal advice_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/civil-legal-advice-and-legal-aid/)

An explanation of civil legal aid and legal advice and the eligibility
criteria to be able to avail of it.

973.90765

  * [ _Money Advice and Budgeting Service_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/mabs-service/)

The Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS) is a free, confidential service
for people who have problems with money management and debt.

917.54504

  * [ _Free Legal Advice Centres (FLAC)_ ](/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/free-legal-advice-centre/)

FLAC (Free Legal Advice Centres) is an independent voluntary organisation that
offers free basic legal information and advice.

804.5727

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

