**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Driver
licensing ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/) > Updating
your personal details on your driving licence or learner permit

#  Updating your personal details on your driving licence or learner permit

  * Introduction 
  * How to apply 
  * Documentary evidence 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

When you apply for a driving licence or learner permit, it is issued in the
name and address you provided at that time. If you later change your name or
address, you can exchange your current licence or permit for an updated one.

You need to provide documents that prove the change. Your new licence or
permit will have the same expiry date as your original licence or permit.

There is no charge for changing your name or address (personal details). If
your driving licence is due for renewal or has been lost, stolen or damaged, a
fee will apply. If you are 70 years or over, you are exempt from paying the
fee.

###  Law on having personal details up-to-date on your licence

You must always carry your driving licence or learner permit with you when
driving. You are not required by law to change your licence or permit if you
change your name or address. However, it is advisable.

When driving, you are required to show evidence of your licence or permit if
requested by An Garda Síochána, so your licence or permit should contain up-
to-date information.

##  How to apply

You can [ apply online ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/update-my-
personal-details.html) or in person in one of the NDLS centres. You do not
have to provide photographs with your application. You do need to bring
additional documents with you to confirm your identity.

###  Applying online

You need the following:

  * Proof of your [ personal public services number (PPSN) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) and a verified [ MyGovID. ](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp)
  * Proof of your address dated within the last 6 months if your current address differs from the one you provided when you applied for your PSC. 
  * A Driving Licence Medical Report Form may be required (see below). 
  * Proof that you are normally resident in Ireland if your place of birth and nationality are outside of the EU/EEA (see below). 
  * There is no fee for making an application to amend personal details unless your driving licence is also due for renewal or has been lost, stolen or damaged, in which case a fee will apply. If you are aged 70 years or over you are exempt from paying the fee. 

###  Applying in person

You must [ book an appointment ](https://www.ndls.ie/booking-service.html) to
attend an [ NDLS centre ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-
person.html#centre-locations) . You will need to bring the required supporting
documents and ID. An application form is no longer needed. Your photograph and
signature will be captured electronically at the NDLS centre.

You must bring the following with you:

  * Your current or most recent driving licence or learner permit. If your licence has been lost, stolen or damaged, you must bring a [ valid photo ID ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#photo-id) with you 
  * Documentary evidence of change of name or address (see below) 
  * Proof of your [ Personal Public Services ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) number (PPSN) (see below) 
  * Proof that you are normally resident in Ireland if your place of birth and nationality are outside of the EU/EEA (see below) 
  * Proof of your address dated within the last 6 months 
  * A Driving Licence Medical Report Form may be required (see below) 

###

##  Documentary evidence

###  Documentary evidence of change of name or address

If you are applying online to change your name, you must have updated your
name with the Department of Social Protection. If applying in person, you need
to provide evidence of your change of name to update these details on your
driving licence or learner permit.

The type of documents required depends on the amends you need, see below:

###  **Change of name upon marriage or civil partnership**

You must provide your original civil marriage or civil partnership
certificate. Certified translations must be submitted with the original
marriage or civil partnership certificate if they are not in English or Irish.
Alternatively, you can present an acceptable form of [ photographic ID
](https://www.ndls.ie/identity-validation.html#photographic-i-d-) issued in
your new name (see Photographic ID below). See the [ NDLS website
](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/update-my-personal-details.html#to-
apply-in-person-at-an-ndls-centre-to-update-your-surname-following-marriage-
or-civil-partnership) for more information.

###  **Change of name upon divorce or separation**

You must submit original evidence of divorce/separation or dissolution of
civil partnership or evidence of initiation of same: a judicial separation
court order or a separation agreement or a divorce decree or a letter from a
solicitor confirming that a separation has been sought. In addition, you
should submit your original UK/Irish birth certificate or your original civil
marriage certificate* or original civil partnership certificate to confirm
your birth surname. Alternatively, you can present an acceptable photographic
I.D issued in your new name.*

Certified translations are required for all marriage certificates or civil
partnership certificates which are not in English or Irish. Translations must
be provided by a reputable company that must be a member of the Irish
Translator and Interpreters Association. The original marriage or civil
partnership certificate must be submitted together with the certified
translation. See the [ NDLS website ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-
driver/update-my-personal-details.html#to-apply-in-person-at-an-ndls-centre-
to-update-your-surname-following-separation-divorce-or-dissolution-of-
partnership-reverting-to-birth-surname) for more information.

###  **Change of name following deed poll**

You must provide an original [ Irish deed poll document ](/en/birth-family-
relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/changing-your-
name/) which has been enrolled in the Irish High Court. Alternatively, you can
present an acceptable [ photographic I.D ](https://www.ndls.ie/identity-
validation.html#photographic-i-d-) issued in your new name. See the [ NDLS
website ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/update-my-personal-
details.html#to-apply-in-person-at-an-ndls-centre-to-change-your-name-
following-a-change-of-name-by-deed-poll) for more information.

###  **Change of name using the Irish version of your name**

You must submit evidence that you are using the Irish version of your name
i.e. 2 official documents that show you've been using your new name for 2
years on the date of application at the NDLS centre. Alternatively, you can
present an acceptable [ photographic I.D ](https://www.ndls.ie/identity-
validation.html#photographic-i-d-) issued in your new name. See the [ NDLS
website ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/update-my-personal-
details.html#to-apply-to-update-your-name-to-the-irish-language-version-of-
your-name) for more information.

###  **Change of address**

You must submit proof of your new address. See ‘Proof of address’ below.

###  Proof of identity

You can use your [ Public Services Card (PSC) ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/public-services-card/) as proof of identity. The name
and address on your learner permit or driving licence application must match
the name and address on your PSC if you want to use your PSC as photographic
ID and proof of address. If you are an EU/EEA citizen you can also use the PSC
as proof of your residency entitlement, otherwise, you must provide a document
from the 'Proof of your residency entitlement' list below.

If you don't have a PSC, you need one document listed on the NDLS website from
each of the sections below:

  * [ Photographic ID ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#photo-id)
  * [ Proof of your residency entitlement ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-normal-residence)
  * [ Evidence of your PPS Number ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-ppsn)
  * [ Proof of address ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-address)

Note: Proof of address documents can be no more than 6 months old at the date
of application. Mobile phone bills and statements from store cards/catalogue
companies are not accepted. You can find a full list of [ documents that will
not be accepted ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-
person.html#documents-that-will-not-be-accepted) on the NDLS website.

##  Where to apply

###  Apply online

You can [ apply online ](https://ndls.rsa.ie/) to update your personal
details. You need to have a [ Public Services Card (PSC) ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) and a [
MyGovID ](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/Home/Index) verified account.

###  Apply in person

You can apply in person to one of the [ National Driver Licence Service (NDLS)
centres ](https://www.ndls.ie/where-to-apply.html) \- see ‘How to apply’
above. You must [ book an appointment online ](https://www.ndls.ie/booking-
service.html) . There is no walk-in service available.

More information is available on the [ National Driver Licence Service website
](https://www.ndls.ie/help/faq.html#updating-your-personal-details) .

###  National Driver Licence Service

Road Safety Authority  
Po Box 858  
Southside Delivery Office  
Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday - Friday 9am - 5pm (excluding Public
Holidays) and Saturdays 9am – 1pm.

**Tel:** 0818 700 800

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ndls.ie/ ](https://www.ndls.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@ndls.ie ](mailto:info@ndls.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/updating-your-driving-licence-or-
learner-permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Updating%20your%20personal%20details%20on%20your%20driving%20licence%20or%20learner%20permit&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/updating-your-driving-licence-or-
learner-permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/updating-your-driving-licence-or-learner-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Updating%20your%20personal%20details%20on%20your%20driving%20licence%20or%20learner%20permit&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/updating-your-driving-licence-or-
learner-permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Replacing a lost, stolen or damaged driving licence or learner permit_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/replacing-a-lost-or-stolen-irish-driving-licence/)

If you have lost or had your most recent driving licence or learner permit
stolen, but is still valid, you can get a replacement.

3635.5703

  * [ _How to renew your driving licence_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/renewing-a-full-driving-licence/)

When your driving licence expires you must renew it if you still want to
drive.

2523.385

  * [ _Your rights if you bought in a shop on or before 28 November 2022_ ](/en/consumer/products-and-services-bought-before-november-2022/your-rights-if-you-bought-in-a-shop-before-november-2022/)

This page explains your consumer rights if you bought something in a shop on
or before 28 November 2022.

2078.741

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

