**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Cycling ](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/) > Lighting of
bicycles in Ireland

#  Lighting of bicycles in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * When do my bike lights have to be switched on? 
  * Can I use flashing front and rear lights? 
  * What is the penalty for not having bike lights? 
  * Does a Garda have a right to stop me if I cycle without lights? 
  * Where can I get bike lights? 

##  Introduction

If you want to use a bike on a public road in Ireland, your bike must be
fitted with reflectors and lights to ensure that other road users will see
you. All bicycles used on public roads must follow the [ Road Traffic
(Lighting of Vehicles) Regulations 1963
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1963/en/si/0189.html) as amended. This law
sets down the type of reflectors and lights that your bicycle must be fitted
with and when you must use them.

##  Rules

All bicycles used on public roads in Ireland must always display a rear
reflector. A rear reflector is a red reflector that can be plainly seen for a
distance of 99 meters when a vehicles headlights shine directly on it. The
only exception to this rule is on a child's bicycle where that bicycle is used
during the daytime.

##  When do my bike lights have to be switched on?

Your bike lights must be switched on during _’lighting-up time‘_ . This period
begins half an hour after sunset and ends half an hour before sunrise on the
following morning. During these hours, all cyclists must have fitted (and make
use of) the following:

  * One front light, shows the front a white or yellow light visible for a reasonable distance 
  * One rear light, fitted to the rear of your bicycle showing a red light that is visible for a reasonable distance 

Lights do not need to be lit when stopped in traffic or when a person wheels
the bike on foot as near as possible to the left-hand edge of the road.

##  Can I use flashing front and rear lights?

Yes, under [ SI 487 of 2009
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2009/en/si/0487.html) , it is legal to use
flashing front and rear lights.

##  What is the penalty for not having bike lights?

Failure to use proper lighting on a bicycle is an offence. If you are stopped
by a member of the Gardai, the Garda may take your name and address, details
about your bike and the time and date of the offence. You may be issued a
fixed charge notice (See our page on [ Laws on cycling in Ireland
](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/cycling-offences/) for more information).
You could be summoned to appear in court, if you do not pay the fine.

##  Does a Garda have a right to stop me if I cycle without lights?

Under [ Section 108 of the Road Traffic Act 1961 (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1961/en/act/pub/0024/sec0108.html#zza24y1961s108)
, a member of the Gardai may demand your name, address and date of birth if
they suspect you have committed any crime or offence. They may also demand
your name, address, and date of birth if they suspect you have been involved
in a collision or caused injury to property or someone else. If you do not
give your name, address, or date of birth, or give a false name, address or
date of birth the Garda can keep your bicycle until they are satisfied with
your identity.

##  Where can I get bike lights?

Most bicycles sold in shops are already fitted with reflectors as standard.
You can buy additional bicycle lights or reflectors at any reputable bicycle
shop.

_**Page edited:** 17 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/lighting-of-bicycles-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Lighting%20of%20bicycles%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/lighting-of-bicycles-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/cycling/lighting-of-bicycles-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Lighting%20of%20bicycles%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/lighting-of-bicycles-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Rights and duties of asylum seekers in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/rights-and-obligations-of-asylum-seekers-in-ireland/)

People applying for international protection in Ireland have certain legal
rights. They also have important duties. Find out about these rights and
obligations.

1166.4722

  * [ _Monitoring and treatment of sex offenders in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/)

This document provides information about the treatment and monitoring of sex
offenders in Ireland. It includes detail on the sex offenders register, post-
release supervision orders, sex offender orders and the treatment of sex
offenders in prison.

1079.9363

  * [ _Recognition of professional qualifications in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/Recognition-of-professional-qualifications-in-ireland/)

Outlines how professional qualifications are regulated in Ireland and in the
EU including the following professions: electrician, teacher, architect,
doctor, accountant and more

1004.80927

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

