**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Public transport ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-
transport/) > Rail services

#  Rail services

  * Introduction 
  * Services for passengers with disabilities 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Iarnród Éireann (or Irish Rail), a subsidiary company of a State-owned
company, Coras Iompair Éireann (CIÉ), is responsible for operating rail
services. Iarnród Éireann falls under the remit of the Department of
Transport. The company operates passenger rail services nationwide and
provides commuter rail services, including the DART service in Dublin.

Many stations have _park and ride_ facilities to encourage commuters to leave
their cars in [ station car parks ](https://www.irishrail.ie/Travel-
Information/Station-Car-Parking) and reduce the volume of traffic.

Free travel on State rail services is available to everyone permanently living
in Ireland that is aged 66 and over. Certain people under that age are also
entitled. [ Get more information about Free Travel ](/en/social-welfare/extra-
social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) .

###  **Fares on public transport**

Most [ reduced fares of 20% on public transport will continue in 2024
](https://www.gov.ie/en/press-release/5c270-budget-2024-to-deliver-further-
reductions-in-fares-and-introduce-new-services-for-families-and-commuters/) .
The 50% price reduction on the Young Adult Leap Card continues in 2024. You
can see the [ National Transport Authority Fare (NTA) Plan 2024
](https://www.nationaltransport.ie/news/nta-publishes-fares-plan/) .

From [ 23 June 2024 there are fare increases
](https://www.nationaltransport.ie/news/first-phase-of-2024-fares-
determination-to-take-effect-from-23rd-june/) on some services.

###  DART

The [ DART (Dublin Area Rapid Transport) ](http://www.irishrail.ie/about-
us/dart-commuter) runs along the east coast of Ireland from Malahide in county
Dublin to Greystones in county Wicklow. Find [ details of the facilities
available in all DART stations ](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-
information/find-a-station) and [ DART timetables
](http://www.irishrail.ie/timetables/timetable-pdfs) on the Iarnród Éireann
website. You can pay your [ DART fares ](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-
tickets/dart) in cash or passengers can buy [ pre-paid tickets
](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/tickets-explained) to get
discounts on your journeys. You can also use [ Leap Cards
](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/smartcards) .

###  Commuter

[ Commuter services ](http://www.irishrail.ie/about-us/dart-commuter) operate
in the Dublin area between Dundalk, Dunboyne, Longford, Portlaoise and Gorey.
There are also commuter services in the Cork area between Mallow, Cobh and
Midleton. [ Commuter rail network maps ](https://www.irishrail.ie/travel-
information/station-and-route-maps) , [ commuter rail fare information
](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/fares-info) and [ commuter
timetables ](http://www.irishrail.ie/timetables/timetable-pdfs) for all
services are available on the Iarnród Éireann website. You can use [ Leap
Cards ](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/smartcards) on commuter
services.

###  InterCity

Iarnród Éireann's [ InterCity services ](http://www.irishrail.ie/about-
us/intercity) provide [ rail links between main towns and cities
](http://www.irishrail.ie/timetables/live-map-intercity) . InterCity services
depart from Dublin's Heuston and Connolly Stations and serve the following
destinations: Belfast, Sligo, Ballina, Westport, Galway, Limerick, Ennis,
Tralee, Cork, Waterford and Rosslare Europort. The Enterprise service operates
between Belfast and Dublin and is jointly run by Iarnród Éireann and Northern
Ireland Rail.

Other InterCity services run between Rosslare Europort and Limerick; Cork and
Tralee; Cork and Limerick; and Limerick and Galway. The InterCity service has
carriages divided between first class and standard class.

###  European Rail

You can find information about tickets for [ UK rail services
](https://www.irishrail.ie/rail-fares-and-tickets/sailrail-uk-ferry) and for [
European rail services ](https://www.irishrail.ie/rail-fares-and-
tickets/interrail-explore-europe) on Iarnród Éireann's web site. Registered
blind passengers travelling by rail or sea to Europe are entitled to buy one
full fare ticket and receive another one free of charge. You must produce your
Companion Free Travel Pass when booking to avail of discount. Details are
available directly from Iarnród Éireann (see where to apply), below.

##  Services for passengers with disabilities

Special arrangements can be made for passengers with disabilities, but it is
recommended that you contact the relevant station or Iarnród Éireann's
Mobility Impaired Liaison Office at least 24 hours before your journey and
give them some details of your travel plans.

DART trains can be accessed directly from platforms and the trains have wide
doors and a large area to accommodate wheelchairs.

Most mainline and suburban and all DART stations have public address systems
giving details of trains and services for people with visual impairments. You
can read more in our page about [ travelling on public transport with a
disability or reduced mobility ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-
transport/travelling-publictransport-with-disability/) .

###  Animals

Guide and assistance dogs are permitted to travel on all services without
restriction. [ Pets ](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-information/travelling-
with-animals) are allowed to travel on DART or commuter trains provided they
are properly restrained. Dogs can only travel on intercity trains in the
guard's van (non-passenger compartment).

###  Luggage

[ Luggage ](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-information/luggage) should be
placed in the specially provided luggage racks, overhead racks or _in-between
seat_ spaces. You must also make sure your luggage is not causing
inconvenience for other passengers. [ Information on carrying bicycles on
trains ](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-information/bicycle-information) is
available on the Iarnród Éireann website.

###  Complaints

If you have [ complaints about Iarnród Éireann services
](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-information/irish-domestic-rail-
travel#puttingthingsright) , you should bring them to the attention of the
relevant station manager. If you want to take your complaint further, you can
contact Customer Relations, Connolly Station, Dublin 1. It is recommended that
you write a letter of complaint, including as much detail as possible (date
and time of travel, where you were travelling from and to and a phone number).
You should also send your ticket, if you still have it. You may get an
immediate response to your complaint but if not, you will get an
acknowledgement within 3 days and you should have a full response within 15
days. You may also [ make complaints or raise customer services issues online
](http://www.irishrail.ie/contact-us) .

###  Compensation and refunds

If your service is seriously delayed for any reason within the control of
Iarnród Éireann, you could be [ entitled to a discount voucher
](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-information/irish-domestic-rail-
travel#compensation) . The value of discount voucher is based on the length of
delay and the fare you have paid for your single journey (that is,
approximately half the value of a return fare).

Refunds in discount vouchers are also given if your seat reservation is not
honoured and no seat of the same standard is available to you.

If the train you planned to catch is delayed or cancelled and you decide not
to travel, you will be given a full cash refund if you return your unused
ticket immediately to the ticket office where you bought it.

If you decide for some other reason not to use a rail ticket you have bought,
you can [ apply for a refund ](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-
information/irish-domestic-rail-travel#refunds) at any main InterCity station,
the Dart office in Pearse Station or any Travel Centre. There may be an
administration fee. If you did not buy your ticket from Iarnród Éireann, you
should return it to the place where you bought it. The ticket issuer will
arrange any refund due and may make a reasonable administration charge.

###  Lost property

Each train station has a lost property office where items found on trains will
be handed in and kept for collection. For more details, you should [ contact
the relevant station ](http://www.irishrail.ie/travel-information/find-a-
station) directly.

##  Rules

###  Obstructions on railway lines and bridges

[ Section 14
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0026/sec0014.html#zza26y1997s14)
of the [ Non-Fatal Offences Against the Person Act 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/act/pub/0026/index.html) makes it an
offence to endanger rail traffic. This includes throwing any dangerous
obstruction on a railway, tampering with any railway machinery, etc. The Act
also prohibits tampering with any signalling equipment, or devices used to
control railway traffic.

If tried in a [ District Court ](/en/justice/courts-system/district-court/)
before a [ judge ](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) , the maximum penalty for
these offences is a [ class C fine ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/) or 12 months in prison or both.

If these offences are tried in a [ Circuit or Central Criminal Court
](/en/justice/courts-system/circuit-court/) , the maximum penalty is a fine or
7 years imprisonment or both.

##  Rates

###  Fares

[ Tickets ](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/tickets-explained) vary
depending on the service you use and you can get full details of leisure
fares, commuter travel fares and UK and European rail fares from the [ Iarnród
Éireann web site ](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/fares-info) .
Prepaid tickets can be bought from ticket offices, ticket machines and online.
Discounted fares are available with the correct identification card.

The [ TFI-90 fare ](https://www.transportforireland.ie/tfi-90-minute-
fare/#:~:text=Travel%20more%20in%20the%20Dublin,and%2065%20cent%20for%20children.)
allows free transfers between Dublin Bus, Luas, DART, commuter rail, and Go-
Ahead Ireland services. This fare applies to most journeys in the Dublin area,
whether involving multiple services within 90 minutes or a single trip

[ Leap Cards ](http://www.irishrail.ie/fares-and-tickets/smartcards) can be
used on DART and commuter services.

The [ Young Adult and Student Leap Cards ](https://about.leapcard.ie/young-
adult-and-student-card-
launch?gclid=CjwKCAjw4c-ZBhAEEiwAZ105RQkk2Mk-w9maaqQyMg3yB-E86D1ULMgi4oWygt3DVj30G-mLPKoabxoCmxEQAvD_BwE)
allow students to get substantially discounted fares on Iarnród Eireann
services. It is only available to full-time students in second and third level
education.

Those claiming free travel must be able to produce a valid Department of
Social Protection Travel Pass.

##  How to apply

You can find [ passenger timetables
](http://www.irishrail.ie/timetables/timetable-pdfs) on the Iarnród Éireann
website.

##  Where to apply

###  Iarnród Éireann

Head Office  
Connolly Station  
Dublin 1  
Ireland

**Tel:** (01) 8366 222

**Locall:** 0818 366222

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irishrail.ie ](http://www.irishrail.ie)

**Contact Form:** [ http://www.irishrail.ie/contact-us
](http://www.irishrail.ie/contact-us)

_**Page edited:** 11 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/public-transport/rail-services-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Rail%20services&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/public-transport/rail-services-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/public-transport/rail-services-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Rail%20services&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/public-transport/rail-services-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Youth Information Centres and Services_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/)

Youth Information Centres and Services provide free, confidential information
for young people and for people who work with young people.

1152.6696

  * [ _Rural transport and Local Link services_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-transport/rural-transport-and-local-link-services/)

Information about Local Link buses linking towns and villages in rural Ireland
and other rural transport options available.

1128.5231

  * [ _Public Services Card_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/)

The Public Services Card is designed to replace other cards such as the free
travel pass and the social services card of the Department of Social
Protection.

1053.9412

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

