**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Air travel ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/) > Air
transport regulation

#  Air transport regulation

  * Who regulates aviation in Ireland? 
  * Irish Aviation Authority 
  * AirNav Ireland 
  * Airports 
  * Air accidents and incidents 

##  Who regulates aviation in Ireland?

The Department of Transport regulates air transport. This includes commercial
and private services.

EU airlines can fly freely within the [ EU/European Economic Area (EEA)
](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-union/european-
union/) . They can do this without any restrictions on flight frequency or
routes.

Airlines from countries outside of the EU/EEA must request permission. They
must do this each time they want to fly to, from, or over Ireland.

The [ Department of Defence ](https://www.defence.ie/) regulates military air
transport in Ireland.

###  **Legislation**

The [ Air Navigation and Transport Act 2022
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2022/act/40/enacted/en/html#:~:text=An%20Act%20to%20provide%20for,on%20it%20of%20certain%20functions)
:

  * Set up a new commercial semi-state body [ AirNav Ireland ](https://www.airnav.ie/home)
  * Made the [ Irish Aviation Authority ](https://www.iaa.ie/) the single aviation regulator for Ireland as it was merged with the Commission for Aviation Regulation 

##  Irish Aviation Authority

The [ Irish Aviation Authority (IAA) ](https://www.iaa.ie/) is a commercial
semi-state agency. It is the national aviation regulator. It is responsible
for safety, security, and consumer protection functions. The IAA has taken on
[ functions previously held by the Commission for Aviation Regulation
](https://www.iaa.ie/about-us/about-the-irish-aviation-authority) .

##  AirNav Ireland

[ AirNav Ireland ](https://www.airnav.ie/) (Irish Air Navigation Service) is a
new semi-state company. It looks after air navigation and air traffic
management and related services functions.

##  Airports

There are 9 airports in Ireland.

[ Dublin ](http://www.dublinairport.com/home.aspx) , [ Cork
](https://www.corkairport.com/) and [ Shannon
](http://www.shannonairport.ie/gns/Passengers/Home.aspx) are owned by the
Irish government and operated on its behalf by separate airport authorities.
The [ other Irish airports ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-
information/bb3245-airports/) are at Waterford, Knock, Galway, Sligo, Donegal,
and Kerry.

[ Passengers with reduced mobility ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/air-
passenger-rights-in-the-eu#lc7b94) have the right to assistance free of
charge.

##  Air accidents and incidents

The Air Accident Investigation Unit is part of the Department of Transport. It
has responsibility for investigating all plane accidents and incidents within
Ireland. You can download [ reports of all air accidents, incidents, and
investigations within Ireland ](http://www.aaiu.ie/reports/aaiu-investigation-
reports) .

_**Page edited:** 2 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/air-travel/air-transport-
regulation/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Air%20transport%20regulation&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/air-travel/air-transport-
regulation/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/air-travel/air-transport-
regulation/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Air%20transport%20regulation&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/air-travel/air-transport-
regulation/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _The regulation of elections_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/elections-and-referenda/voting/electoral-commission/)

An Coimisiún Toghcháin (the Electoral Commission) oversees elections and
referendums in Ireland.

1106.43

  * [ _Overview of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/overview-of-general-data-protection-regulation/)

This document outlines the main elements of the GDPR and links to further
information about it.

982.2873

  * [ _Customs regulations for travellers to Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/customs-regulations-for-travellers/)

Find out about the important rules in place regarding customs regulations for
people travelling to Ireland.

939.0887

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

