**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Buying or
selling a vehicle ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-
vehicle/) > Change of vehicle ownership

#  Change of vehicle ownership

  * Introduction 
  * If you sell a vehicle privately 
  * If you sell your vehicle to a motor dealer 
  * Buying a vehicle with a registered owner deceased 
  * Older vehicles 
  * Motor tax 
  * Changing address details 
  * Replacing lost documents 
  * If the seller won’t send the Vehicle Registration Certificate 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

If you sell your vehicle or trade it in for a new model, you must legally
register the change of ownership. You register free of charge with the
Department of Transport. The Department of Transport keep a record of vehicles
called the national vehicle and driver file (NVDF).

Ownership and address details must be kept up to date at all times. This is
important because, for example, if your vehicle is subject to a safety recall,
manufacturers will contact all registered owners using their record. Upon
receipt it takes approximately 2 to 5 days to process a Vehicle Registration
Certificate.

This page tells you how to change a vehicles ownership detail on a Vehicle
Registration Certificate (VRC, also known as the logbook).

##  If you sell a vehicle privately

There are 4 steps in a private sale for changing vehicle ownership. It is your
responsibility as the seller to ensure it is done correctly.

  1. Complete and sign the change of ownership section on the back of the Vehicle Registration Certificate (VRC). 
  2. The buyer must sign the same form. 
  3. Send the completed form to the Department of Transport for updating (see ‘Where to apply’). 
  4. The Department of Transport will post the VRC to the new owner. 

##  If you sell your vehicle to a motor dealer

If you sell your vehicle to a motor dealer, you must give the dealer the
Vehicle Registration Certificate.

Both the seller and the dealer must complete the [ Form RF105 (pdf)
](https://www.motortax.ie/OMT/pdf/RF105_en.pdf) .

An [ approved dealer can use the online change of vehicle ownership service
](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/1ba443-motor-taxvehicle-
registration/?referrer=http://www.dttas.ie/roads/english/motor-taxvehicle-
registraton-nvdf#online-change-of-vehicle-ownership-service) to notify the
details online. Otherwise, the seller must send the RF105 to the Department of
Transport.

##  Buying a vehicle with a registered owner deceased

If you buy a vehicle and the current owner (seller) is deceased, you will need
the Vehicle Registration Certificate and a letter to show you have the right
to the vehicle. This can be a letter from:

  * The executor of the deceased's will, or 
  * The solicitor dealing with the will 

###  If there is no VRC

If the VRC is not available, you can use a declaration of ownership form. To
do this, you must get a statutory declaration sworn before a commissioner for
oaths or a solicitor. The statutory declaration is a way of swearing that
something is true. It is a written statement and must be witnessed by someone
who is authorised to witness your declaration. The statutory declaration form
should go with the letter from the executor of the will or the solicitor.

You can get a statutory declaration form from your [ local motor tax office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/1fc151-find-your-local-motor-tax-office/) .

##  Older vehicles

**Pre-1993 vehicles**

See [ change of ownership for vehicles registered before January 1993
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/98b32-change-of-vehicle-ownership/#vehicle-
registered-before-1-january-1993) .

**1993 – 2004 vehicles**

Owners of vehicles registered before May 2004 may still have a ‘Vehicle
Licensing Certificate’ if they haven’t changed ownership. In such cases, a
Vehicle Registration Certificate will be issued to the new owner upon change
of ownership.

##  Motor tax

You can only tax your vehicle once the registration of the change of ownership
has gone through.

You can renew your motor tax online or by completing a Form RF100A.

See our page on [ motor tax ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-
and-insurance/motor-tax-rates/) .

If you need to change ownership of a vehicle that has never been taxed either
by the current or last owner see [ motortax.ie
](https://www.motortax.ie/OMT/changeOwnership.do) .

If you are a [ driver or a passenger with a disability, you may get tax relief
](/en/travel-and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-
drivers-and-disabled-passengers/) when buying a vehicle.

##  Changing address details

If your address has changed, tick the change of address option on the reverse
side of your Vehicle Registration Certificate (VRC). Fill in your new address
details and post it to the Department of Transport. An updated VRC will be
posted back to you. You can change your address online, but only as part of an
online [ motor tax ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-
insurance/motor-tax-rates/) transaction. You cannot change your address by
email or over the phone.

##  Replacing lost documents

It is possible to get replacement documents associated with changes to vehicle
ownership. List of documents and the cost of their replacement is as follows:

**Replacement documents** Document  |  Replacement cost   
---|---  
Registration book  |  €12   
Vehicle licensing certificate/Registration Certificate  |  €12   
Tax disc  |  €6   
  
To get replacement documents:

  * [ Download and complete form RF134 (pdf) ](https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2021-08/rf134_english.pdf) . 
  * Have this form witnessed by a member of the Garda Síochána at a [ Garda station ](http://www.garda.ie/stations/default.aspx) . 
  * Send your completed form with the correct fee to your motor tax office. 

You can pay by cheque, postal order or by bank draft. You should make it
payable to your [ local motor tax office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/1fc151-find-your-local-motor-tax-office/) .

##  If the seller won’t send the Vehicle Registration Certificate

If you are having problems and the seller won’t send the VRC to the Department
of Transport.

You as the buyer can do the following:

  * Contact the Department of Transport, you can email [ dvcsdchangeofownership@dttas.ie ](mailto:dvcsdchangeofownership@dttas.ie) , (include your postal address), and you will be given a statutory declaration form. 
  * Complete the declaration form and have it witnessed by a Commissioner for Oaths or a practicing solicitor. 
  * Send both completed documents back to the Department of Transport – see ‘Where to apply’ below. 

This does not apply if you bought the car from a motor dealer. The motor
dealer is responsible for following the procedures for change of vehicle
ownership notification.

##  Where to apply

###  Driver and Vehicle Computer Services Division

Department of Transport  
Shannon Town Centre  
Shannon  
Clare  
Ireland

**Tel:** 0818 411 412

**Homepage:** [ http://www.gov.ie/transport ](http://www.gov.ie/transport)

**Email:** [ Motortax@transport.gov.ie ](mailto:Motortax@transport.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 October 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/change-of-
ownership/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Change%20of%20vehicle%20ownership&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/change-of-
ownership/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/change-of-
ownership/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Change%20of%20vehicle%20ownership&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/change-of-
ownership/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Categories of motor vehicles and minimum age of drivers_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/)

Motor vehicles in Ireland are divided into different categories for driver
licensing purposes. Information is provide on categories of vehicles and the
minimum age you need to be in order to legally drive them.

1449.4606

  * [ _Ownership of primary schools_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/ownership-of-primary-schools/)

Who owns primary schools and how they are they funded?

1168.5413

  * [ _Registering the birth of your baby_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/registering-birth-your-baby/)

Find out how to register the birth of your baby in Ireland and how to get a
copy of a birth certificate.

1126.0911

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

