**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Roads and safety ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-
safety/) > School Traffic Wardens

#  School Traffic Wardens

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

Each local authority can arrange with An Garda Sióchána for school traffic
wardens to patrol places where school children cross public roads. The school
traffic warden’s role is to ensure that primary school children cross public
roads safely to and from school.

The law governing the appointment of school traffic wardens is the [ Road
Traffic Act, 1961 (Section 96), (as amended)
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1961/act/24/section/96/enacted/en/html#sec96)
. School traffic wardens usually work in the mornings, at lunchtime and in the
evenings, when children are most likely to cross the road to or from school.

School traffic wardens wear a distinctive uniform (a high-visibility coat and
hat). They must also carry a distinctive sign (a white disc with a red border
and the word ‘Stop’ in the centre).

By displaying this sign, the school traffic warden can stop the traffic to
enable schoolchildren to cross the road safely. Traffic must remain stopped if
the warden displays the sign.

###  Junior traffic wardens scheme

In many places, junior traffic wardens (usually senior pupils of primary
schools) work in teams of 6 to provide a similar service as the school traffic
warden.

A signal requesting traffic to stop is given from both sides of the road.
After traffic stops, the 6 junior traffic wardens take their position and
guide younger children across the public road. All vehicles must remain
stopped until all the junior traffic wardens have returned to the footpath.

To ensure the junior traffic wardens can carry out their function correctly,
they must have a clear view of the road. Drivers should never stop or park in
positions where they could obstruct the view of junior traffic wardens or
school traffic wardens.

##  Rules

School traffic wardens can only stop vehicles on a public road if they are
wearing the appropriate uniform and exhibiting the proper sign.

[ Under Section 96 of the Road Traffic Act 1961, (as amended)
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1961/act/24/section/96/enacted/en/html#sec96)
, you are guilty of an offence if you fail to stop a vehicle or animal (or to
remain stopped) when a school traffic warden holds up their stop sign. This
offence carries an initial €160 fine and 2 penalty points. If you do not pay
the fine within 28 days, the fine increases first to €240. If you do not pay
the fine and are summoned to court, you could be fined even more and get 5
penalty points.

Before starting their job, each school traffic warden must undergo a
comprehensive training programme organised by their local authority about road
safety and their duties.

##  Rates

School traffic wardens are paid employees of a local authority. They are
generally employed part-time with a maximum number of hours per week. You can
also read about [ retirement ages in the public sector
](/en/employment/retirement/older-people-and-working/retirement-age-in-
ireland#le88d4) .

##  How to apply

Local authorities routinely advertise for positions such as school traffic
wardens in their areas. These adverts are normally carried in local or
national newspapers, parish or community newsletters or on local radio.

[ Check your local authority website
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) for school
warden vacancies or for more information.

_**Page edited:** 17 January 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/school-traffic-wardens-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=School%20Traffic%20Wardens&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/school-traffic-wardens-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/roads-and-safety/school-traffic-wardens-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=School%20Traffic%20Wardens&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/school-traffic-wardens-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Traffic wardens_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/traffic-wardens-in-ireland/)

Traffic wardens are responsible for enforcing the law relating to the illegal
parking and stopping of motor vehicles. Find out about their responsibilities
here.

1891.2279

  * [ _Enrol your child in primary school when you return to Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/enrolling-your-child-in-a-primary-school-after-returning-to-ireland/)

Information on choosing a primary school, how to apply for a school place,
receiving an offer and where to find help if you can’t find a suitable school.

1377.6967

  * [ _School terms in primary and post-primary school_ ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-primary-and-postprimary/)

Christmas, Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised in Irish schools.
Information about the length of the school year and holidays at primary and
post-primary level.

1371.447

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

