**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Sport and leisure ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-
leisure/) > Fishing licences and permits

#  Fishing licences and permits

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * How to apply 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Fishing for sport or recreation is known as angling. In Ireland, angling is
regulated by the government agency [ Inland Fisheries Ireland (IFI)
](http://www.fisheriesireland.ie/) . The main function of IFI is to advise the
Minister for Environment, Climate and Communications, about the conservation,
protection, management, development and improvement of inland fisheries and
sea angling. The IFI also ensures that national and local fisheries laws are
observed in both inland waterways and out to the 12-mile fishing limit off the
coast. It also ensures that Ireland's fisheries resources are protected and
conserved.

Angling is divided into the following categories:

  * [ Sea fishing ](http://www.fishinginireland.info/sea/index.htm)
  * [ Pike ](http://www.fishinginireland.info/pike/index.htm)
  * [ Salmon and sea trout ](http://www.fishinginireland.info/salmon/index.htm)
  * [ Coarse fishing ](http://www.fishinginireland.info/coarse/index.htm)
  * [ River trout ](http://www.fishinginireland.info/trout/index.htm)

Some species of fish are protected in Ireland including salmon, sea trout, sea
bass, molluscs, eels, and all freshwater fish. You must get a state licence to
fish for salmon or sea trout in Ireland.

###  Fish farms

Fish populations in inland waterways can be negatively affected by water
pollution, fish kills and other problems. The IFI has a fish stock management
programme that restores fish populations in affected areas. Fish stock
management has also been used to enhance the status of fisheries and to
protect and conserve species. [ Read more about fish farms in Ireland
](https://www.fisheriesireland.ie/services/business-services/fish-farm) .

###  Protection of resources

Inland Fisheries Ireland, the [ Irish Naval Service
](https://www.military.ie/en/who-we-are/naval-service/) , the [ Aer Corps
](https://www.military.ie/en/who-we-are/air-corps/) and [ An Garda Síochána
](http://www.garda.ie/) are all involved in protecting Ireland’s inland and
sea fishery resources. These agencies have a national patrol plan that
coordinates protection and surveillance operations. They have a visible
presence in waters and powers to prosecute offenders (and confiscate illegal
nets, equipment, tackle and catch).

###  Tagging and recording salmon catches

There is a system of tagging and recording the details of all commercial and
recreational salmon catches. Similar systems are used by Canada, France,
Spain, and the US. Tagging supplies valuable catch statistics and an estimate
of salmon stocks.

All salmon (and sea trout over 40cm) that are kept must be tagged and logged
in a logbook. You must return your completed logbook and any unused tags to
the IFI by 19 October each year. You should use the pre-printed envelope
supplied at the time of purchase. You must return your logbook and tags, even
if you did not catch any fish. Further information on the [ Salmon and Sea
Trout Tagging Scheme
](http://www.fishinginireland.info/salmon/salmontagging.htm) is available on
IFI's angling website [ fishinginireland.info
](http://www.fishinginireland.info/) .

##  Rules

  * The majority of waters in Ireland are owned either privately or by the State. A fishing permit issued by the owner of the waterway gives you the right to fish for a fixed period ranging from a day to a season. 
  * The only legal way to catch freshwater fish is by rod and line. It is illegal for one person to use more than two rods at a time. 
  * It is illegal to use live fish as bait. 
  * You must get a [ State fishing licence ](http://www.fishinginireland.info/regulations.htm) , tags and a separate fishing permit to fish for salmon and sea trout. The cost and duration of permits will vary. (See ‘How to apply’). 
  * There is an angling bag limit of 10 salmon (any size) or sea trout (over 40 cm) on rivers where you may catch and keep salmon. The bag limits are subject to any quota allocated to a river and its tributaries. [ Read more about angling bag limits ](https://fishinginireland.info/salmon/salmonregs/) . 
  * Most fisheries close on 30 September each year (though some close on various dates between 15 September and 12 October). Check with [ your local IFI office ](http://www.fisheriesireland.ie/About-Us/contact-us.html) for further information. 
  * There are [ some areas where it is illegal to keep or kill any sea trout ](https://fishinginireland.info/salmon/salmonregs/) . 
  * On some waters, "fly-only" regulations or other restrictions may be in place. Check with the owner of the waterway or your local Fisheries District Office for more information. 

[ Find further information on fishing regulations
](https://fishinginireland.info/salmon/salmonregs/) .

##  Rates

You need a state licence to fish for salmon or sea trout. You can buy a
licence for a period of one day or up to a year. Information on licences and
their cost is available on the Inland Fisheries Ireland (IFI) angling website,
where you can also [ purchase the licence online
](https://store.fishinginireland.info/) .

Having a licence to fish for salmon and sea trout does not entitle you to
fish. You may also need to get a fishing permit or permission from the
fisheries owner. In general, a fishing permit costs from €36 to €50 a day.
Some of the more exclusive fisheries can be more expensive.

##  How to apply

[ Contact your local fishing tackle shop
](http://www.fishinginireland.info/tackleshops/index.htm) , your local
Fisheries District Office or [ Inland Fisheries Ireland
](https://www.fisheriesireland.ie/) (IFI) for more information about fishing
licences, permits and angling in your area.

##  Where to apply

###  Inland Fisheries Ireland

3044 Lake Drive  
Citywest Business Campus  
Dublin 24  
D24 Y265  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 1 884 2600

**Fax:** +353 1 836 0060

**Homepage:** [ http://www.fisheriesireland.ie/
](http://www.fisheriesireland.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@fisheriesireland.ie ](mailto:info@fisheriesireland.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/fishing-licences-and-
permits/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Fishing%20licences%20and%20permits&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/fishing-licences-and-
permits/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/sport-and-leisure/fishing-licences-and-
permits/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Fishing%20licences%20and%20permits&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/fishing-licences-and-
permits/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Dog licences and ownership_ ](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/control-of-dogs/)

Rules on owning and control your dogs in Ireland. Includes licensing,
microchipping and restrictions for certain breeds.

1652.8992

  * [ _Foreign driving licences in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-permit/)

How to exchange a driving licence issued in another country for an Irish
driving licence, including information on the fees and a list of recognised
exchange countries.

1644.166

  * [ _Boat licences and safety regulations_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/licensing-of-boats-and-watercraft-in-ireland/)

If you want to operate a boat or watercraft in Ireland, there are certain
rules you need to follow. Find out if you need a boat licence and what safety
equipment you may need.

1574.1553

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

