**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Cycling ](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/) > Laws on
cycling in Ireland

#  Laws on cycling in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Securing your bike 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

In the interest of safety, cyclists must obey the [ rules of the road
](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/resources/rules-of-the-road) .
As a cyclist, you are particularly vulnerable and face a real risk of serious
injury or death if you are involved in an accident.

You are legally obliged to keep your bike in good working order. You must
cycle with reasonable consideration, and be sober enough to control your bike.

If you ride a bike on a public road in Ireland, it must be fitted with
reflectors and lights to ensure that you are visible. All bikes on public
roads must comply with the [ Road Traffic (Lighting of Vehicles) Regulations
1963 ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1963/en/si/0189.html) (as amended). This
law sets down the type of reflectors and lights your bike must have and when
you must use your bike lights. See our page on [ Bicycle lights ](/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/lighting-of-bicycles-in-ireland/) for more information.

In addition to lights, your bike must also have:

  * A bell, which can be heard from a reasonable distance 
  * Front and rear brakes (unless it has one fixed wheel, where it needs only one brake) 
  * A rear reflector that can be seen from a reasonable distance 

##  Rules

###  What other rules of the road apply to cyclists?

The [ Road Traffic Acts 1961 (as amended)
](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1961/act/24/front/revised/en/html) set
out the main provisions for motoring and legislation for bikes. There is also
secondary legislation including the [ Road Traffic Acts and Road Traffic
(Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997-2019
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/si/182/made/en/print) , which
regulates the behaviour of motorists and cyclists.

When cycling you must:

  * Stop at traffic lights when required 
  * Stop at pedestrian crossings and zebra crossings 
  * Stop at cycle traffic lights when required 
  * Stop at stop signs and yield the right of way at yield signs 
  * Avoid cycling on motorways 

[ Section 100 of the Road Traffic Act 1961
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1961/en/act/pub/0024/sec0100.html#sec100)
makes it an offence to ride a bicycle while holding on to another moving
vehicle (other than another bicycle which no one is riding).

###  Do I have to wear a cycling helmet or hi-visibility clothing?

You are not legally obliged to wear a helmet or hi-visibility clothing while
cycling in Ireland, but the Road Safety Authority of Ireland recommends
cyclists wear both for safety.

###  Is it legal to cycle two abreast in Ireland?

Cyclists can cycle two abreast but under [ Article 47 of the Road Traffic
(Traffic and Parking) 1997 Regulations
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/si/182/made/en/print#article47) (as
substituted by the 2012 Regulations), you must not cycle more than two
abreast, except when overtaking and it does not endanger or obstruct other
traffic.

###  Can I overtake a vehicle on the inside?

A cyclist can overtake a vehicle on the left (or inside of the flow of
traffic) if the vehicles to the right are stationary or moving more slowly
than the cyclist.

However as a cyclist you cannot overtake on the inside if the vehicle you
intend to overtake:

  * Is signalling an intention to turn to the left and will move to the left before you overtake it 
  * Is stationary to allow a passenger to alight or board the vehicle 
  * Is stationary for the purposes of loading or unloading 

###  What are the rules about overtaking cyclists?

When overtaking, it is recommended that drivers should leave 1.5 metres
between them and your bicycle in areas with speed limits above 50km/h. In
areas with lower speed limits, drivers should allow one metre when overtaking.

It is a [ separate offence
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2019/si/495/made/en/print) to overtake a
cyclist dangerously. Drivers who overtake you dangerously while you are
cycling are liable for a fixed charge of €120, and could have 3 [ penalty
points ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/penalty-points-
for-driving-offences/) added to their licence.

###  Am I legally obliged to use cycle lanes?

You must use a cycle lane in a pedestrianised area where an appropriate one is
provided.

Where the cycle lane is a contra-flow cycle lane (allowing cyclists to go in
the opposite direction to the traffic on a one-way street), you can only cycle
in the contra-flow direction.

The regulation on cycle lanes is contained in [ Article 14 of the Road Traffic
(Traffic and Parking) (Amendment) Regulations 1997, as amended
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/si/182/made/en/print#article14) .

###  What are fixed charge offences?

Gardaí can stop cyclists and fine them for specific fixed charge cycling
offences. Gardaí can fine cyclists for the following offences:

  * No front or rear light during lighting-up hours 
  * Riding a bicycle without reasonable consideration 
  * Failing to stop for a school warden sign 
  * Failing to stop at traffic lights when the red lamp is lit 
  * Failing to stop at cycle traffic lights when the red lamp is lit 
  * Failing to stop at a stop line, barrier or half barrier at a railway level crossing, swing bridge, or lifting bridge, when the red lamps are flashing 
  * Cycling in a pedestrianised street or area 

The fine for these offences is €40. If you receive a fixed charge notice, you
have 28 days from the date of the issue of the fixed charge notice to pay the
fine. If it is not paid within 28 days, the charge is increased by 50%. If it
is not paid within 56 days, then court proceedings are initiated (and payment
will no longer be accepted).

If you misplace, lose or damage your fixed charge notice, you should contact
the Garda Fixed Charge Processing Office (see ‘Where to apply’ below). A re-
print of the notice will be sent to you by post. However, the time period
allowed for payment is not extended by your request for a re-print.

If you pay the fixed charge notice within the legal time limits and court
proceedings are not commenced, you will not have a criminal record regarding
the offence.

[ Further information on fixed charge notices ](https://www.garda.ie/en/Roads-
Policing/Fixed-Charge-Notices/) is available on the Garda website. If you
receive a fixed charge notice from An Garda Síochána, you can apply to have it
cancelled due to exceptional circumstances. See the [ guide to cancellations
of fixed charge notices ](https://www.garda.ie/en/Roads-Policing/Fixed-Charge-
Notices/Cancelling-Fixed-Charge-Notices.html) .

###  Is it legal to cycle on a footpath?

You are not allowed to cycle on a footpath unless there is a designated cycle
lane on the footpath or you are entering or exiting a property. Cycling on a
footpath is not a specific fixed charge offence though. However, you could be
fined for doing so if a garda deemed their cycling to be without ’ _reasonable
consideration_ ‘.

Similarly, you cannot cycle in a pedestrianized area at the designated times
unless there is a cycle lane.

###  Is there a legal alcohol limit for cycling?

If a Garda suspects you are cycling under the influence of alcohol or drugs to
the point that you do not have proper control of the bike, you can be arrested
without a warrant. This is also the case if a Garda has reasonable grounds to
suspect you are riding a stolen bike.

##  Securing your bike

###  What steps can I take to prevent my bike from being stolen?

Gardaí advise people to spend a minimum of 10 to 20 per cent of the cost of
their bike on 2 bike locks. They also recommend that you should:

  * Lock your bike tightly to an immovable object like a bike stand or lamppost 
  * Keep the lock off the ground 
  * Lock your bike in-doors or in a well-lit public area if possible 
  * Photograph and keep a note of your bike’s serial number 
  * Always report a bike theft to the Gardaí 

According to Garda figures, the most common time a bike is stolen is during
daylight, between 8am and 5pm.

##  Where to apply

###  Garda Fixed Charge Processing Office

Parnell Street  
Thurles  
Co. Tipperary  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 504 59800

**Locall:** 0818 50 60 80

**Homepage:** [ http://www.garda.ie/Controller.aspx?Page=348&Lang=1
](http://www.garda.ie/Controller.aspx?Page=348&Lang=1)

**Email:** [ npo@garda.ie ](mailto:npo@garda.ie)

_**Page edited:** 2 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/cycling-offences/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Laws%20on%20cycling%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/cycling-offences/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/cycling/cycling-offences/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Laws%20on%20cycling%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/cycling-offences/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Cycling in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/overview-cycling/)

This is an overview page on cycling. It includes information on bike sharing
schemes, Greenway trails and taking your bike on public transport.

1406.1028

  * [ _Employment laws in Ireland_ ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/employment-rights-and-duties/employment-laws-in-ireland/)

Summary of the main employment legislation in Ireland.

860.55817

  * [ _The law on mental health in Ireland_ ](/en/health/health-services/mental-health/mental-health-act-2001/)

The Mental Health Act 2001 is the law on how and why you can be admitted to a
psychiatric hospital and your rights as a patient. The Mental Health Bill 2024
is set to replace the existing Mental Health Acts 2001–2022 if passed by the
Oireachtas.

859.96295

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

