**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Driver
licensing ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/) > Foreign
driving licences in Ireland

#  Foreign driving licences in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Recognised states 
  * Driving on a foreign licence in Ireland 
  * Rates 
  * How to exchange your licence 
  * Further information and contacts 

##  Introduction

You can exchange a driving licence issued by an [ EU member state
](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/european-union/european-
union/) or an EEA member state (Norway, Liechtenstein, and Iceland) for an
Irish driving licence.

You can also exchange a driving licence issued by certain recognised states
for an Irish driving licence. See ‘Recognised states below’.

You can drive on your Ukrainian driving licence while in Ireland under
temporary protection. You can no longer exchange your Ukrainian licence for an
Irish licence. Read more in our page on [ coming to Ireland from Ukraine
](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-
ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine#l1cd8a) .

If your driving licence was issued by a country that is not recognised for
driving licence exchange, you cannot exchange your licence for an Irish
licence. You must go through the full driver licensing procedure starting with
the [ driver theory test ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-
tests/driver-theory-test/) . However, when you have your learner permit, you
will only need to take 6 essential driver training (EDT) lessons instead of
the usual 12 lessons.

##  Recognised states

You can exchange your licence if it was issued by an EU or EEA country. If you
want to exchange your EU or EEA licence, you must do so within 10 years of its
expiry date. You can also exchange a UK licence.

If it was issued by a country that is outside the EU or EEA, you can apply to
exchange it for an Irish licence if your licence was issued by:

  * Australia 
  * Canada (but not from all provinces – see note below) 
  * Georgia 
  * Gibraltar 
  * Guernsey 
  * Isle of Man 
  * Japan 
  * Jersey 
  * South Africa 
  * Republic of Korea (South Korea) 
  * Switzerland 
  * New Zealand 
  * Northern Ireland 
  * Taiwan 
  * UK 

**Note** : You can exchange a Canadian licence that was issued by the
following provinces:

  * Alberta 
  * British Columbia 
  * Manitoba 
  * New Brunswick 
  * Newfoundland and Labrador 
  * Ontario 
  * Saskatchewan 

Not all categories of licences can be exchanged in every case. You can read
more about the [ specific exchange rules ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-
driver/exchange-my-foreign-driving-licence.html#recognised-states) governing
each country and territory listed above on the NDLS website.

You must exchange your licence within 1 year of its expiration date.

###  Licences that were previously exchanged

If your original licence was issued in a non-recognised country, and you
exchanged it for a licence in a recognised country, you cannot exchange your
licence for an Irish licence.

##  Driving on a foreign licence in Ireland

If you have a driving licence issued by an **EU or EEA member state,** you can
drive in Ireland as long as your existing licence is valid. If you want to
exchange your driving licence for an equivalent Irish driving licence when it
expires, you must do so within 10 years of your driving licence expiring.

###  UK licences

If you hold a UK driving licence, you can drive in Ireland if you live in the
UK and are visiting Ireland. You can no longer drive on your UK licence if you
live in Ireland. A UK driving licence is regarded as a licence from a
recognised state for exchange purposes. See ‘recognised states’ below. You can
also read more on the [ NDLS website ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-
driver/exchange-my-uk-ni-licence.html) .

###  Recognised states

If your licence was issued by one of the countries or territories listed in
‘recognised states’ above, you can drive in Ireland for up to 1 year when
visiting, providing your licence is valid.

If you become normally resident in Ireland, you should exchange your driving
licence or begin the process of applying for an Irish driving licence. You are
normally a resident in Ireland if, because of personal and occupational ties,
you usually live here for at least 185 days in each calendar year.

###  Ukrainian licence

You can drive on your Ukrainian driving licence while in Ireland under
temporary protection. You can no longer exchange it for an Irish driving
licence. If you have already exchanged your Ukrainian driving licence for an
Irish licence, you can request to have it returned to you, or continue to
drive on your Irish licence for one year from the date it was issued.

You can read more about this in our page on [ coming to Ireland from Ukraine
](/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/the-asylum-process-in-
ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine#l1cd8a) .

###  Other licenses

If your licence was issued in a country that is not in the EU, EEA or the list
of recognised states, and you hold a national driving licence and an
international driving permit from your own country, you may drive in Ireland
for the duration of your temporary visit (up to 12 months).

If your stay in Ireland will be more than 12 months, you can apply for an
Irish driving licence but you will need to go through the full driver
licensing procedure. You can read what you need to do in our page on [ Steps
learning to drive ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-
licensing/learning-to-drive/) .

You can only exchange a full driving licence. Foreign learner permits cannot
be used to drive in Ireland or be exchanged for an Irish learner permit.

##  Rates

The fee for exchanging a foreign driving permit for an Irish driving licence
is €55. (free if you are 70 or over).

Any required eyesight tests or medical examinations are **not** free of
charge.

##  How to exchange your licence

You can apply to exchange your licence online or in person at a National
Driving Licencing Service (NDLS) centre.

You may need to include a medical report with your application. The NDLS has
information on [ when a medical report is needed
](https://www.ndls.ie/medical-fitness/do-i-need-to-submit-a-medical-
report.html) .

###  Applying online

You can apply to exchange your licence online. You will need the following:

  * A [ Public Services Card ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/public-services-card/) and verified [ MyGovID ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-works/egovernment/mygovid/)
  * Your current licence or most recent driving licence 
  * [ Proof of your address ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-address) dated within the last 6 months, if your address is different to the one you provided when you got your Public Services Card 
  * Proof that you are normally resident in Ireland if you are not an EU or EEA citizen 
  * A [ medical report form ](https://www.ndls.ie/medical-fitness/do-i-need-to-submit-a-medical-report.html) if required dated within one month 
  * A completed [ eyesight report ](https://www.ndls.ie/images/Documents/DrivingLicence/155076_NDLS_Eyesight_Rep_V9_Online_FA_BD_PDFX.pdf) if applying to [ exchange a licence issued by a recognised state ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/exchange-my-foreign-driving-licence.html#to-apply-in-person-at-an-ndls-centre-to-exchange-a-foreign-driving-licence-issued-by-a-recognised-state)
  * Application fee of €55 (unless you are 70 or over) 
  * [ Certificate of Professional Competence (CPC) ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/professional-drivers/cpc) for professional drivers, if needed 

You must post your licence to the NDLS after you have completed the online
form.

Sometimes, the NDLS may need to contact the country that issued your driving
licence. If so, it might take a little longer before they can give you a
driving licence in Ireland.

###  Applying in person

You can apply in person to one of the of the NDLS centres. You must make an
appointment. You should bring the following with you to your appointment:

  * Current or most recent driving licence. Failure to submit your foreign driving licence will result in your application for exchange being rejected. 
  * [ Proof of your PPS number ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-ppsn)
  * [ Photo ID ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#photo-id)
  * [ Proof of your address ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-address) dated within the last 6 months, if your address is different to the one you provided when you got your Public Services Card 
  * Proof that you are normally resident in Ireland if you are not an EU or EEA citizen 
  * [ Medical report ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/services/s1.5-driving-test/medical-report-form-d501.pdf?sfvrsn=c678b8f_17) if required dated within one month 
  * A completed [ eyesight report ](https://www.ndls.ie/images/Documents/DrivingLicence/155076_NDLS_Eyesight_Rep_V9_Online_FA_BD_PDFX.pdf) if applying to [ exchange a licence issued by a recognised state ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/exchange-my-foreign-driving-licence.html#to-apply-in-person-at-an-ndls-centre-to-exchange-a-foreign-driving-licence-issued-by-a-recognised-state)
  * [ Certificate of Professional Competence (CPC) ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/professional-drivers/cpc) if needed 
  * Application fee of €55 (unless you are 70 or over) 

Sometimes, the NDLS may need to contact the country that issued your driving
licence. If so, it might take a little longer before they can give you a
driving licence in Ireland.

Read the [ FAQs about exchanging a foreign driving licence
](https://www.ndls.ie/help/faq.html#exchange-of-foreign-driving-licences) on
the NDLS website.

##  Further information and contacts

The National Driver Licence Service has [ information about foreign driving
licences ](https://www.ndls.ie/holders-of-foreign-licences.html) .

###  Professional (CPC) truck or bus driver

You can get [ information about becoming a professional (CPC) truck or bus
driver ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/professional-drivers/cpc/become-a-
professional-cpc-driver) . Find out more, [ if you already have a bus or truck
licence from another EU country or outside the EU
](https://www.rsa.ie/services/professional-drivers/cpc/foreign-cpc-drivers) .

###  National Driver Licence Service

Road Safety Authority  
Po Box 858  
Southside Delivery Office  
Cork  
Ireland

**Opening Hours:** Lines open Monday - Friday 9am - 5pm (excluding Public
Holidays) and Saturdays 9am – 1pm.

**Tel:** 0818 700 800

**Homepage:** [ https://www.ndls.ie/ ](https://www.ndls.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@ndls.ie ](mailto:info@ndls.ie)

###  Road Safety Authority (RSA)

Moy Business Park  
Primrose Hill  
Ballina  
Co Mayo  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ http://www.rsa.ie ](http://www.rsa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Foreign%20driving%20licences%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Foreign%20driving%20licences%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-
permit/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How do I add a category to my Irish driving licence?_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/how-do-i-add-a-category-to-my-irish-driving-licence/)

Find out how to add a category of motor vehicle to your driver’s licence.

1891.3618

  * [ _How to renew your driving licence_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/renewing-a-full-driving-licence/)

When your driving licence expires you must renew it if you still want to
drive.

1779.0824

  * [ _Applying for a driving licence_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/full-driving-licence/)

Driving licences are issued if you pass a driving test. Rules about driving
licences, forms and how to apply.

1691.4333

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

