**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Roads and safety ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-
safety/) > National speed limits in Ireland

#  National speed limits in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Enforcement 
  * Road speed limits 
  * Fines and penalties 

##  Introduction

The [ Department of Transport ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-
of-transport/) sets national speed limits. There are 5 different types of
speed limits and different limits apply to different types of roads throughout
the country. If you are coming to Ireland for the first time or you are
learning to drive, it is important for you to be aware of the speed limit on
the roads.

Speed limits are expressed through distinctive road signs throughout the
country that state the limit in each area. These signs are found on every
motorway, major roads, and minor roads throughout Ireland. They consist of a
circular sign with a white background and a red border. The speed limit in
kilometres is shown in the centre of the sign in black numerals (i.e. 30
kilometres per hour, 60, 80, etc.). Road distances and speed limits in Ireland
are measured in kilometres. You can read more in the [ guidelines for setting
and managing speed limits in Ireland (pdf)
](https://www.speedlimits.ie/_files/ugd/971679_1d14f0eefdcc426785d3dd1058a33ae6.pdf)
.

##  Enforcement

The Irish police force (Garda Síochána) enforces road traffic legislation to
ensure that citizens comply with speed limits. This means the Gardaí detect
speeding offences and initiate proceedings by issuing fixed penalties to
motorists who break speed limits.

###  Safety cameras

An Garda Síochána has contracted the GoSafe consortium to operate safety
cameras on their behalf. The safety cameras, operated by GoSafe staff have
been on roads with a history of collisions occurring where speed was a
contributory factor. The cameras operate from vans which are marked with high
visibility reflective material and display a safety camera symbol.

Average speed detection is also used in Ireland. On certain roads in Ireland,
the average speed you travel can be detected by average speed cameras. These
cameras measure your average speed while driving between 2 points, unlike
traditional speed cameras that only check your speed at one specific point
along a road. The average speed camera tracks how long it takes you to travel
between 2 points and uses this information to calculate your average speed.

There are average speed cameras on the M7 motorway and the Dublin Port Tunnel.
By the end of 2024, other locations are expected to have them. More
information is available on [ garda.ie ](https://www.garda.ie/en/roads-
policing/road-safety/) .

##  Road speed limits

There is a total of 5 different types of speed limits throughout Ireland:

  * Town and city speed limits 
  * National road speed limits 
  * Regional and local road speed limits 
  * Motorway speed limits 
  * Special speed limits 

###  Town and city speed limits (50 km/h)

A speed limit of 50 kilometres per hour is in place in built-up areas (other
than motorways or special speed limit zones).

###  National road speed limits (100 km/h)

A speed limit of 100 kilometres per hour is in place on all national roads
(including dual carriageways) throughout Ireland.

###  Regional and local speed limits (80 km/h)

A speed limit of 80 kilometres per hour is in place on all regional and local
roads (sometimes called national roads).

###  Motorway speed limits (120 km/h)

A speed limit of 120 kilometres per hour is in place on all motorways. You
should note that learner drivers, vehicles under 50 cc, bicycles, pedestrians,
animals and invalid carriages are not allowed on motorways in Ireland.

###  Special speed limits (30 km/h or 60 km/h.)

Special speed limits are sometimes applied to designated roads and zones
(mainly, for example, on roads outside built-up areas, around schools, etc.).
Special speed limits are generally for 30 km/h or 60 km/h. [ Local authorities
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) in Ireland can
introduce bye-laws to set special speed limits in designated areas. A member
of the public can [ object to and appeal an existing speed limit
](https://www.speedlimits.ie/appeals) contained within a Local Authority’s
current special speed limit bye-laws. You can get more information about speed
limit bye-laws and appeals on [ speedlimits.ie ](https://www.speedlimits.ie/)
. Read more about the [ powers of local authorities ](/en/government-in-
ireland/how-government-works/local-and-regional-government/functions-of-local-
authorities/) .

###  Ordinary speed limits

Certain vehicles in Ireland (specifically those vehicles that are intended or
adapted for the carriage of people, vehicles greater than a certain weight and
vehicles that are pulling trailers) are subject to different speed limits than
those outlined above.

  * Single and double deck buses and coaches (carrying standing passengers) - 65 km/h 
  * Single and double deck buses and coaches (with accommodation for more than 8 passengers but does not carry standing passengers) - Motorways and dual carriageways 100 km/h, Other roads - 80 km/h 
  * Towing Vehicles - 80 km/h 
  * Trucks (with a design gross weight of more than 3,500kg) - Motorways - 90 km/h, Other roads - 80 km/h 

###  Exceptions to speed limits

Speed limits do not apply in Ireland to ambulances, fire brigade services or
Garda vehicles being used during duty.

More information about speed limits is available in the [ Rules of the Road
(pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/road-safety/rules-of-the-
road.pdf?sfvrsn=e0334acb_0) .

It is an offence for anyone to use a speed meter detector in any vehicle in
Ireland under the [ Road Traffic (Speed Meter Detectors) Regulations, 1991
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1991/en/si/0050.html) . Under this
legislation, importing, fitting and supplying speed meter detectors and
jammers is also an offence.

The Gardai are empowered to seize this equipment if it is found in your
vehicle or in your possession under the Customs Consolidation Act 1876.

##  Fines and penalties

If you drive over the speed limit, you will get 3 penalty points and a fixed
charge fine of €160. If you do not pay the fine within 28 days, it increases
to €240. If you do not pay this within 28 days (56 days from the original fine
notification date), you will be summonsed to court where, if convicted, you
could be fined up to €1000 and receive up to 5 penalty points.

If you were not the driver of the vehicle, you must complete the relevant
section on the notice and return it within 28 days of its issue.

Further information on fixed-charge notices is available in our [ page on
driving offences ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-
offences/driving-offences/) .

_**Page edited:** 2 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/road-traffic-speed-limits-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=National%20speed%20limits%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/road-traffic-speed-limits-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/roads-and-safety/road-traffic-speed-limits-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=National%20speed%20limits%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/roads-and-safety/road-traffic-speed-limits-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Time limits for the start of criminal proceedings_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/time-limitations/)

Information on the time limits for the commencement of criminal proceedings in
Ireland is provided.

1495.677

  * [ _Different types of marriage ceremony in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/getting-married/different-legal-ways-of-getting-married/)

There are 3 different ways to legally marry in Ireland.

1303.1592

  * [ _Rules for different types of debts_ ](/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/debt/specific-debts/)

A guide to the rules and practices around specific types of debt.

1071.1941

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

