**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Sport and leisure ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-
leisure/) > How to set up a new club

#  How to set up a new club

  * Getting started 
  * Putting the club together 
  * Meetings 
  * Finance 
  * Insurance 
  * Data Protection 
  * Garda Vetting 
  * Working with children and young people 
  * More information 

##  Getting started

If you are setting up a club, such as a sports club, there are a few questions
you should consider:

  * Are there enough potential members? 
  * Are there enough volunteers to run the club? 
  * Is there another club in the area that is already meeting the need for this type of club? 

If there is a national governing body (NGB) for the sport or activity you
should contact it for advice.

Once you have decided to set up a club there are a number of things you will
need to agree on.

##  Putting the club together

###  Club structure

One of the first things you will have to decide is what legal structure to use
for the club. The most common and simplest structure for a club is an
_unincorporated association_ . This is the structure we cover in this page.

It involves drawing up a set of rules to regulate the relationship between the
members of the club. This is known as the club’s constitution. It also usually
provides for a committee to run the club's affairs. Under this structure, the
club has no separate legal personality, and the club members are personally
liable for the actions or debts of the club. If the club wants to employ staff
or lease property, it may find that an unincorporated association is too
limited a structure for this.

Sport Ireland provides information on the various types of legal structures,
along with the advantages and disadvantages of each type, in the [ NGB Support
Kit ](https://www.sportireland.ie/news/better-boards-stronger-sport-toolkit)
on its website.

You may wish to register the club as a charity. You can find out more
information in our page [ What is a charity? ](/en/government-in-
ireland/charities/what-is-a-charity/) Also see 'More information' below for
details on setting up a charity.

###  Club name

You must have a club name to draw up formal documents and open a bank account.
The name can be anything you decide but you should check that no other local
club has the same name.

###  Club constitution

The club constitution is a written document that states the rules and
structures that govern the club. It outlines the functions of the club and the
procedures for membership, meetings, and committees. A club constitution is
usually required for funding and if applying for tax relief.

If there is a national governing body, it may be able to provide you with a
model constitution which you could adapt. Sports clubs often have copies of
their constitutions on their websites. You can find [ guidance on
constitutions ](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-
charities/guidance-for-charities) on the Charities Regulator website.

###  Club officials

A club needs a number of officials to run the club. The minimum requirement
is:

  * Chairperson 
  * Secretary 
  * Treasurer 

These are elected posts and the holders are members of the club committee.
There can be other members on the committee as laid out in the club’s
constitution, for example, a Fundraising Officer. A club can also have other
roles outside of the formal club positions and club members may volunteer to
carry out these roles.

##  Meetings

You should hold meetings to help run the club.

###  Annual general meeting

An annual general meeting (AGM) is held each year so that all members can have
input into the running of the club. The club committee is elected at the AGM.

###  Committee meetings

The club committee is the group of members who are formally responsible for
managing the club. Establishing a committee with clearly identified roles can
help to identify who does what in the club and can help to spread the
workload. The committee should meet several times a year. Information on a
code of practice for good governance of community, voluntary and charitable
organisation's is available at the [ Charities Regulator website
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-charities/charities-
governance-code) .

##  Finance

You will have to raise funds to run the club. Initially, these funds may come
from membership subscriptions. You should also outline the costs of running
the club for the year. This will help you create a budget of income and
expenditure for the next 12 months.

You will need a bank account in the name of the club. The bank will usually
ask for two signatories for withdrawing cash or signing cheques.

The Treasurer must maintain either:

  * A bound account book for recording details of the financial affairs of the club or 
  * A computer programme from which printouts can be made in the format of an account book. Appropriate backup arrangements should be made to avoid irretrievable loss of data. 

All monies and cheques received should be paid into the club bank account and
recorded in the account book. Receipts should be issued for any cash received.
The accounts may have to be audited each year.

There is a scheme of tax relief on income for certain eligible charities and
other approved bodies, including sporting bodies. Information on tax relief
for sporting bodies and charities is available in the [ charities and sports
bodies section of revenue.ie. ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/companies-and-
charities/charities-and-sports-bodies/index.aspx)

##  Insurance

As an unincorporated association, the club members are personally liable for
the actions or debts of the club. Therefore, the club should get adequate
insurance to cover its members. It should have suitable public liability
insurance and professional indemnity insurance for its activities. You may be
able to get insurance advice from the club’s national governing body, if there
is one.

##  Data Protection

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into force across the EU on
25 May 2018. This regulation increases club's responsibilities regarding how
they collect, use and store member's personal data. Clubs need to understand
their responsibilities under data protection law and have adequate procedures
in place.

####  Collecting and processing personal data

When you set up a new club, you will start collecting or using personal data,
for example, to manage your club’s membership. You will need to get people’s
consent to do this. Consent must be requested whether you are using paper
membership forms, membership databases or other systems. When asking for
consent to process people’s data, for example, on membership forms or for
Gardaí vetting, you must tell them:

  * The club’s identity and contact details 
  * The reasons for collecting the data 
  * The uses it will be put to 
  * Who their data will be disclosed to (and if it will be transferred outside the EU) 
  * The [ legal basis ](http://gdprandyou.ie/gdpr-12-steps/#what-we-mean-when-we-talk-about-a-legal-basis) for processing the data 
  * How long the data will be kept 
  * That they can complain if they are unhappy with how the club is complying with data protection regulations 
  * If their data will be subject to automated decision making 
  * Their rights under GDPR, for example, in relation to accessing, rectifying and erasing data, see below. 

You must provide this information in easy to understand, clear language. You
must also be able to demonstrate that consent was given (pre-ticked boxes or
inactivity cannot be taken as consent).

####  Processing children’s data

If your club works with children and will be collecting and processing their
data, you must ensure you have systems in place to verify their age and
collect consent from their guardians. [ Find out more about processing
children’s data on dataprotection.ie
](http://gdprandyou.ie/gdpr-12-steps/#processing-childrens-data) .

####  People asking for access to data held about them

People have a number of [ rights under GDPR ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-
protection/rights-under-general-data-protection-regulation/) , which clubs
must comply with and be able to respond to. The main rights include being
entitled to:

  * Access the personal data held about them 
  * Have their personal data rectified if it is inaccurate or incomplete 
  * Have their personal data erased 
  * Restrict the processing of their information, including automated decision-making 
  * Object to direct marketing 
  * Information about the collection and processing of their personal data, for example, how and why their data is being collected and processed, and if the data will be shared with a third-party (as above). 

Clubs must be able to respond to requests from people who want to access the
personal data the club holds about them within 1 month. Read more about [
rights under GDPR ](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-
general-data-protection-regulation/) .

####  Reporting data breaches

Personal data must be kept securely (encrypted if using technology) and should
only be retained for as long as it is needed for the original purpose it was
collected. If your security is breached and people’s personal data is
destroyed, lost, altered or accessed by an unauthorised person or
organisation, you must report this to the [ Data Protection Commission (DPC)
](https://dataprotection.ie/docs/Home/4.htm) .

You must report a data breach within 72 hours of becoming aware of it. Data
breaches that can harm an individual, for example, identity theft, must also
be reported to the person concerned.

Your club can be inspected and could face significant penalties if you are in
breach of GDPR.

You can find out more on [ dataprotection.ie ](https://www.dataprotection.ie/)
.

##  Garda Vetting

People working with children or vulnerable adults must be vetted by the Garda
Síochána National Vetting Bureau. Find out more about this in our page on [
Garda vetting ](/en/employment/employment-rights-and-conditions/data-
protection-at-work/garda-vetting/) .

##  Working with children and young people

If your club works with children, you should develop specific policies and
procedures on how to create a safe environment to prevent deliberate harm or
abuse to the children using your services. These policies and procedures
should cover:

  * Dealing with child protection concerns 
  * Reporting child protection concerns 
  * Working safely with children 
  * Recruiting and managing staff 
  * Child safeguarding awareness and training 
  * Involving parents and children 
  * Implementing and reviewing the safeguarding strategies 

For more information about safeguarding best practices, see Tusla's [ Child
Safeguarding: A Guide for Policy, Procedure and Practice (pdf)
](https://www.tusla.ie/uploads/content/Tusla_-_Child_Safeguarding_-
_A_Guide_for_Policy,_Procedure_and_Practice.pdf) .

##  More information

**The Wheel** is a support and representative body for community and voluntary
organisations and charities. It provides [ information on forming a charity
](https://www.wheel.ie/advice-guidance/forming-your-organisation) as well as a
[ factsheet on setting up a charity (pdf)
](https://www.wheel.ie/sites/default/files/media/file-
uploads/2018-08/Factsheet_Forming_A_Charity.pdf) on its website.

The **Charities Regulator** is the national statutory regulatory agency for
charitable organisations. Any organisation that wants to operate as a charity
must register with the Charities Regulator. There is [ more information on the
Charities Regulator website
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-charities/guidance-for-
charities) .

[ Local Development Companies (LDCs) ](https://ildn.ie/about/local-
development-companies/) are known by many different names including Local Area
Partnerships and LEADER Partnerships. Among other things they provide support
for community groups.

_**Page edited:** 17 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/setting-up-a-new-
club/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=How%20to%20set%20up%20a%20new%20club&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/setting-up-a-new-
club/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/sport-and-leisure/setting-up-a-new-
club/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=How%20to%20set%20up%20a%20new%20club&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/setting-up-a-new-
club/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Step-by-step guide to setting up a business in Ireland_ ](/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-employment/step-by-step-guide-to-setting-up-a-business-in-ireland/)

Find out how to set up a business in Ireland, from writing a business plan to
hiring employees.

1908.5317

  * [ _Coming to set up a business or invest in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-set-up-a-business-in-ireland/)

Information for foreign nationals on the immigrant investor and entrepreneur
schemes.

1254.7393

  * [ _Postnatal check-ups for you and your baby_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/after-your-baby-is-born/postnatal-care/)

Find out what happens at you and your baby's postnatal check-ups, and when
they happen.

969.10376

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

