**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Travel abroad ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-abroad/) >
Travelling abroad and vaccinations

#  Travelling abroad and vaccinations

  * Introduction 
  * When should I start thinking about the vaccines I need? 
  * International Certificate of Vaccination 
  * Cost of vaccines for travel 
  * When you return 
  * More Information 

##  Introduction

If you normally live in Ireland and are travelling abroad, you should check
whether you need vaccinations to travel to the country or countries you plan
to visit. Vaccines should be considered if you are travelling to areas outside
of Western Europe, North America, Australia, and New Zealand. Health risks
vary from country to country, so seek advice from your family doctor ( [ GP
](/en/health/health-services/gp-and-hospital-services/) ), [ Health Service
Executive (HSE) ](/en/health/health-system/health-service-executive/) , travel
health clinic or travel agent in advance of travel.

The HSE has information on [ travel-associated infectious
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/az/t/travel-vaccinations/when-travel-
vaccinations-are-necessary.html) such as yellow fever, typhoid or [ Hepatitis
A ](https://www2.hse.ie/conditions/hepatitis/) on its website.

You can get travel advice from the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) on the
country that you plan to visit. The [ World Health Organisation
](http://www.who.int/countries/en/) (WHO) also provides some information.

###

##  When should I start thinking about the vaccines I need?

Start the process of vaccination well before you plan to travel. Some
vaccinations take time to become effective so give yourself at least 8 weeks
to protect yourself fully. An early start to the process is particularly
important if you plan to travel with children. The BCG vaccination against
tuberculosis (TB), for example, should be given at least 3 months before your
child travels.

Certain vaccinations are compulsory. In these cases, you will need to show an
[ International Certificate of Vaccination
](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/226681) (record of your vaccines) to
gain access to the country in question.

Other vaccinations are recommended, and the decision is left to your own
discretion, however, it makes sense to do everything you can to guard against
illness and disease while you are away.

You will not need vaccinations to visit any European country, unless you have
visited a non-European country shortly beforehand.

##  International Certificate of Vaccination

This is a record of compulsory vaccines, and it is a yellow card. This is
needed when you are travelling to some countries. Make sure to check before
you travel. You should get this card when you are getting vaccinated. Make
sure that you record your vaccinations on an [ International Vaccination
Certificate ](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/226681) .

##  Cost of vaccines for travel

Travel vaccinations are not free in Ireland through the public health system -
even if you hold a medical card. You will have to pay the full cost of
vaccinations. A charge will usually be made for your visit to the doctor and
in addition, you will have to pay for each vaccine or set of tablets
prescribed.

##  When you return

If you feel ill following your return to Ireland, make sure that you see a
doctor as soon as possible. Give full details of the countries you visited; in
case this should be relevant.

**Notifiable infectious diseases**

The law in Ireland makes special provisions regarding the reporting of
infectious diseases to the national [ Health Protection Surveillance Centre
](http://www.hpsc.ie/) . As soon as a medical practitioner in Ireland becomes
aware of, or suspects that a person they are attending is suffering from, or
is the carrier of an infectious disease, they are required to transmit a
written or electronic notification to a Medical Officer of Health.

Notification of infectious diseases is necessary to control infectious
diseases. Ireland's Health Protection Surveillance Centre works in partnership
with health service providers and organisations in other countries to ensure
that up-to-date information is available to contribute to the effective
control of infectious diseases.

##  More Information

You can get more information from the [ HSE website
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/health/immunisation/pubinfo/adult/travelvacc/) or
contact your GP or travel health clinic.

_**Page edited:** 4 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-abroad/vaccinations-health-
tips/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Travelling%20abroad%20and%20vaccinations&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-abroad/vaccinations-health-
tips/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/travel-abroad/vaccinations-health-
tips/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Travelling%20abroad%20and%20vaccinations&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-abroad/vaccinations-health-
tips/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Vaccinations for children and young people_ ](/en/health/health-services/children-s-health/vaccinations-for-children/)

Vaccination and immunisation services for children are free of charge.

1459.9471

  * [ _Working in Ireland after living abroad_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/working-in-Ireland-after-living-abroad/)

This page includes the key things to consider if you plan to work when you
return to Ireland. It covers finding a job, your employment rights and the
taxes you have to pay.

944.57043

  * [ _Going abroad or on holidays and social welfare payments_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/going-abroad-and-social-welfare-payments/)

Outlines the social welfare payments that will continue to be paid if you go
abroad. It also lists the payments that will not be paid if you go abroad.

943.3298

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

