**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Travel to Ireland ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-
ireland/) > Travelling to Ireland

#  Travelling to Ireland

  * Getting there 
  * Travel restrictions 
  * Identity and visa requirements for entering Ireland 
  * What you can bring with you 
  * Getting around and public transport 
  * Healthcare in Ireland 
  * Practical tips 
  * More information 

##  Getting there

Getting to Ireland is easier than ever with direct flights to major and
regional airports and ferries arriving at several ports of entry.

Always make sure your passport is in date well in advance of travelling.

###

**Mode of Transportation** |  **Entry points**  
---|---  
**Direct flights** |  [ Dublin ](https://www.dublinairport.com/) [ Shannon ](https://www.shannonairport.ie/) [ Cork ](https://www.corkairport.com/) [ Knock ](https://www.irelandwestairport.com/) [ Belfast ](https://www.belfastairport.com/)  
**Regional airports** |  [ Waterford ](https://www.waterfordairport.ie/) [ Galway ](https://www.galwayairport.com/) [ Sligo ](https://www.irelandwestairport.com/) [ Donegal ](https://www.donegalairport.ie/) [ Kerry ](https://www.kerryairport.ie/)  
**Ferry** |  [ Dublin Port ](https://www.dublinport.ie/) [ Rosslare Europort ](https://www.rosslareeuroport.ie/) [ Port of Cork ](https://www.portofcork.ie/) [ Belfast Port ](https://www.belfast-harbour.co.uk/)  
  
##  Travel restrictions

Since 6 March 2022, there are no COVID-19 restrictions for travel to Ireland.

You should follow [ public health advice
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/3361b-public-health-updates/) if you
develop symptoms of COVID-19.

##  Identity and visa requirements for entering Ireland

You can find out about [ what documents you will need to travel Ireland
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/e1607-information-for-travel-into-ireland-
from-another-eu-country/) .

You may need to apply for a visa if you are travelling to Ireland and you are
not a citizen of the UK, Switzerland, or a country in the European Economic
Area (the EU plus Norway, Iceland, and Lichtenstein).

You can check to see [ if you need a visa
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/visa-
requirements-for-entering-ireland/#16e51d) .

##  What you can bring with you

You must keep to the specific allowances if you want to bring alcohol,
tobacco, or other goods into Ireland. If you are from a non-EU country, you
must complete a cash declaration if you intend to bring over €10,000 in cash
into the country. More information is available on [ customs regulations for
travellers to Ireland ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/travel-to-ireland/customs-regulations-for-travellers/) .

##  Getting around and public transport

It is easy to get around, whether you use public transport or rent a car in
Ireland.

[ Public transport
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel_and_recreation/public_transport/)
includes buses, rail, the Luas tram system, taxis, hackneys, and limousines.

You can also find out [ how to get to and from Dublin Airport
](https://www.dublinairport.com/to-from-the-airport) .

[ Renting a car in Ireland ](/en/consumer/cars/renting-a-car/) can be a useful
way to travel. You must have a valid driving licence to drive in Ireland. If
you have a valid full foreign driving licence, you can use this for up to 12
months while visiting Ireland.

Read more information about [ getting around in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-
in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-return-to-ireland/) .

##  Healthcare in Ireland

It is always advisable to take out travel insurance before travelling.

If you are visiting Ireland, you may be entitled to health services that are
free or subsidised, depending on your circumstances. Read more about [ health
services for visitors to Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/health-services-
and-visitors-to-ireland/) .

If you are visiting Ireland from the EU/EEA and Switzerland, you can use a
valid [ European Health Insurance Card
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-
abroad/european-health-insurance-card/) from your home country to access
healthcare.

##  Practical tips

###  Currency

Ireland uses the Euro. Credit cards and debit cards are widely accepted, but
carrying some smaller amounts of cash is advisable.

###  Language

Irish and English are the official languages. You can most often hear Irish in
rural [ Gaeltacht areas ](https://udaras.ie/en/our-language-the-gaeltacht/the-
gaeltacht/#:~:text=The%20Gaeltacht%20covers%20large%20areas,is%2096%2C090%20\(2016%20Census\).)
.

##  More information

###  Things to do in Ireland

You can get more information about [ things to do in Ireland from
discoverireland.ie ](https://www.discoverireland.ie/things-to-
do?gad_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAiAuNGuBhAkEiwAGId4agozUV81ANKwVyKIrRsVyMSd9JFGGVhxJ7Ua4w-G1lNx8cGb9lAaKhoCjs0QAvD_BwE)
. You can find out about the walking trails in our page on [ walking and
rambling ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-
and-leisure/walking-and-rambling-in-ireland/) .

###  Driving in Ireland

The Road Safety Authority (RSA) has helpful [ advice for tourists driving on
the roads in Ireland ](https://www.rsa.ie/road-safety/road-users/tourists) .

###  Travelling with pets

You can get information about [ bringing your pet to Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/coming-to-live-in-ireland/bringing-pets-to-ireland/) .

###  Contact details for the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA)

The Irish government website [ DFA.ie ](https://www.dfa.ie/) has information
about visas, passports and contact details for embassies.

###  Emergency services

The emergency services telephone number is 999 or 112.

###  Reporting a crime

Information is available about [ reporting a crime
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/law-enforcement/reporting-a-
crime/) . There is also help available from the [ Irish Tourist Assistance
service ](http://www.itas.ie/) if you are a victim of a crime.

###  Irish weather

You can check the Irish weather forecast on [ MET éireann
](https://www.met.ie/) , the Irish meteorological service.

_**Page edited:** 4 March 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/travel-to-ireland-during-
covid/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Travelling%20to%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/travel-to-ireland-during-
covid/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/travel-to-ireland/travel-to-ireland-during-
covid/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Travelling%20to%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/travel-to-ireland-during-
covid/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Travelling from Ireland for healthcare in Europe_ ](/en/health/eu-healthcare/travelling-for-healthcare/)

Introduction to the options for Irish residents who want to access healthcare
in other countries in Europe.

1360.5457

  * [ _Customs regulations for travellers to Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/customs-regulations-for-travellers/)

Find out about the important rules in place regarding customs regulations for
people travelling to Ireland.

1213.1298

  * [ _Visas for tourists visiting Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/visas-for-ireland/visas-for-tourists-visiting-ireland/)

Information about coming to Ireland for a short stay (less than 90 days).

987.1817

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

