**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Buying or
selling a vehicle ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-
vehicle/) > Owning a motorcycle in Ireland

#  Owning a motorcycle in Ireland

  * Getting started with your motorcycle 
  * Steps to learning to drive 
  * Staying safe on your motorcycle 
  * Buying and using a motorcycle helmet 
  * Motorcycles lights 
  * More information 

##  Getting started with your motorcycle

If you ride a motorcycle on a public road, you must follow the [ rules of the
road (pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/services/s1.8-learner-
driver-resources/rules-of-the-road-2020.pdf?sfvrsn=6d948b39_2) and carry a
valid driving licence for the [ correct category of motorcycle ](/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-
minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/) .

You must have [ motor tax ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-
insurance/motor-tax-rates/) and [ motorcycle insurance ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/motor-tax-and-insurance/motor-insurance/) .

###  **Learner drivers**

If you are a learner driver, you must wear a high-visibility yellow
fluorescent vest. You must wear it over your clothing, and it must be in good
condition. You can [ order a free hi-vis vest from Road Safety Authority
](https://www.rsaorders.ie/index.php?route=product/category&path=71_106) .

You must have learner rider L plates (no less than 15 cm high) in red on a
white background on the front and rear.

You must complete your [ Initial Basic Training (IBT)
](https://www.rsa.ie/en/RSA/Learner-Drivers/Motorcyclists/Initial-basic-
training-IBT-for-motorcyclists/) before you can drive unsupervised – see [
practise driving ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring-1/driver-
licensing/learning-to-drive#l92c6e) for more information.

On this page, you can get information about how to get your motorcycle licence
and tips on driving safely.

##  Steps to learning to drive

The steps to learning to drive are:

  1. Pass the [ driver theory test ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driver-theory-test/)
  2. Get a [ learner permit ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/learner-driving-permits-for-cars-and-work-vehicles/)
  3. [ Practise driving ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring-1/driver-licensing/learning-to-drive#l92c6e)
  4. Pass the driving test 

Driver testing in Ireland is carried out by the [ Road Safety Authority (RSA)
](https://www.rsa.ie/en/) . The [ National Driver Licencing Service (NDLS)
](https://www.ndls.ie/index.php) is responsible for issuing learner permits
and driver licences.

Once you have passed your driving test, you can apply for your [ driving
licence ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/full-driving-
licence/) .

##  Staying safe on your motorcycle

Although motorcyclists represent less than 2% of all licensed vehicle drivers
in the country, they account for 10% of road deaths.

As a motorcyclist, you are legally required to do certain things:

###  **Your bike and safety equipment**

  * Ensure that your motorcycle is always roadworthy. 
  * Check that your tyres are of the [ correct tread depth ](https://www.rsa.ie/road-safety/road-users/vehicle-components/tyres/wheel-and-tyre-maintenance#:~:text=What%20is%20the%20minimum%20recommended,new%20tyres%20have%208.0%20mm.) . 
  * Wear an approved helmet and protective clothing. 

###  **When driving**

  * Always maintain concentration when driving. 
  * Try to anticipate potential hazards on the road. 
  * Drive at a speed that enables you to stop within the appropriate distance if necessary. 
  * Keep a safe distance between you and the vehicle in front of you. 
  * Be aware of adverse weather and poor road conditions. 

###  **Staying seen**

  * Be always visible. 
  * Use your headlights day and night. 

It is illegal in Ireland to drink or take drugs and drive any vehicle. For
more details, see our page on [ driving offences ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/driving-offences/) . You must also follow
the [ national speed limits in Ireland ](/en/travel-and-recreation/roads-and-
safety/national-toll-roads-in-ireland/) .

##  Buying and using a motorcycle helmet

You should:

  * Buy a good quality helmet from a reputable dealer. Try several different sizes and makes. Make sure the dealer knows how to assess proper fit. 
  * Never buy or use a second-hand helmet. 
  * Replace a damaged helmet immediately. 
  * Always wear your helmet and make sure it is securely fastened. 

The Road Safety Authority (RSA) publication [ This is your Bike - a safety
guide for you and your motorcycle or moped (pdf)
](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/road-
safety/r1.3-motorcyclists/this_is_your_bike.pdf?sfvrsn=b10c6282_13) has advice
on buying and using a motorcycle helmet.

##  Motorcycles lights

There are rules about the type of lights and reflectors that must be fitted to
your motorcycle. Motorcycle must have the following:

**One headlight** : This is fitted to the front of the motorcycle to light the
road ahead with a white or yellow light. The lamp should light the road ahead
for a distance of 99 metres (325 feet) or 30.5 metres (100 feet) when dipped,
and a reasonable distance for low-powered motorcycles.

**One rear light** : This is fitted to the rear of the motorcycle. This lamp
should provide a red light that is visible for 152 metres (500 feet) when lit.

**One rear reflector** : This is a red reflector that can be seen for a
distance of 99 metres (325 feet) to the rear when the headlights of another
vehicle shine directly on it.

**Registration plate lighting** : This is a white light to illuminate the rear
registration plate so that each letter and number can be easily read from a
distance of 20 metres (65 feet) to the rear.

**Indicators** : These are flashing lights fitted to a motorcycle to let other
road users know that the driver intends to turn right or left.

**Position light** : This is fitted up to 1.5 metres (5 feet) from the ground
to provide white light to the front which is visible for 152 metres (500
feet). This lamp must be 7 watts or less. A position light is only needed if
the motorcycle is not fitted with a headlight or if a side-car is attached.

###  Motorcycle sidecars must have:

  * One white position lamp 
  * One red rear lamp 
  * One red rear reflector 

###  Use of a headlight

You should dip the headlight on your motorcycle in the following situations:

  * Meeting oncoming vehicles (for example, vehicles coming towards you from the opposite direction) 
  * In built-up areas where public lighting is provided and special speed limit areas 
  * In times of poor visibility (for example, heavy fog, snow, rain, or dust) 
  * Travelling behind another vehicle 
  * When not using your head-light would cause an inconvenience to other road users 

###  Lighting-up hours

All motorcyclists must use lights (other than stop lights) during lighting-up
hours. Lighting-up hours start half an hour after sunset and end half an hour
before sunrise. If you are using your motorcycle during the day when
visibility is poor, you must use your lights.

These rules are set down in the [ Road Traffic (Lighting of Vehicles)
Regulations, 1963 (as amended)
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1963/en/si/0189.html) . The Regulations aim
to prevent accidents and protect the lives of road users. The Garda Síochána
are responsible for enforcing the law on motorcycle lights.

##  More information

You can get more information from the [ RSA website
](https://www.rsa.ie/services) .

You can get information on [ motorcycle safety gear ](https://www.rsa.ie/road-
safety/road-users/motorcyclists/safety-gear) , [ steps to getting qualified as
a driver ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/get-qualified) and [
preparing your motorcycle for your driving test
](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/the-driving-test/driving-test-
vehicles/motorcycle) .

You can [ apply for your driving test online ](https://ndls.rsa.ie/) .

_**Page edited:** 17 April 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/owning-a-motorcycle-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Owning%20a%20motorcycle%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/owning-a-motorcycle-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/owning-a-motorcycle-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Owning%20a%20motorcycle%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/buying-or-selling-a-vehicle/owning-a-motorcycle-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _How to get your foreign qualification recognised in Ireland_ ](/en/returning-to-ireland/education-and-schooling/getting-your-foreign-qualification-recognised-in-ireland/)

Outlines the services and online tools available to get recognition for your
foreign qualification in Ireland. Also explains how the National Framework of
Qualifications can help you compare and contrast different qualifications.

1340.7506

  * [ _Owning and operating drones in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/owning-and-operating-a-drone/)

If you want to fly a drone, you must register as a drone operator in most
cases. This page has information on how to do this and the rules for flying
drones.

1230.3398

  * [ _Owning and using a firearm in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/firearms-in-ireland/)

You can apply to own and use a firearm in Ireland with certain restrictions.
Firearms can include guns, crossbows or airguns. Find out about gun laws in
Ireland and how to apply for your firearm licence.

1160.4658

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

