**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Sport and leisure ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-
leisure/) > Deer hunting licences

#  Deer hunting licences

  * Introduction 
  * When is a deer hunting licence valid? 
  * Rules for a deer hunting licence 
  * Cost of a deer hunting licence 
  * How to apply for a deer hunting licence 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Deer are a protected species in Ireland under the [ Wildlife Act, 1976 (as
amended) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1976/act/39/revised/en/html) .
It is a serious offence to hunt them without a licence.

In Ireland, the wild deer population consists of red, fallow, sika, muntjac
and hybrid deer. Conservation rangers employed by the National Parks and
Wildlife Service (NPWS) manage the wild deer population in Ireland's national
parks. The NPWS is part of the Department of Housing, Local Government and
Heritage. Landowners are responsible for the control of wild deer on their
private property.

Applications for deer hunting licences are processed by the NPWS.

Licences are issued for the period from **1 August to 31 July** **and must be
renewed** **annually.** Deer hunting licences are free.

The number of wild deer hunting licences issued by the NPWS changes from year
to year, depending on demand, and the management of the deer population. The
open season for deer hunting (see below) in Ireland changes from year to year
depending on the location and species of deer.

Landowners can apply for a [ Section 42 licence
](https://www.npws.ie/licencesandconsents/disturbance/stop-damage-flora-and-
fauna-wild-animals) to control deer outside of open hunting season if the deer
are causing damage.

From June 2024, you can only [ apply online for a deer hunting licence
](https://portal.heritage.gov.ie/en-US/SignIn) .

##  When is a deer hunting licence valid?

Licences are valid for the hunting season each year from 1 August to 31 July.
You must also comply with the wild deer open season (see table below).

You must renew your licence each year.

Conservation rangers employed by the National Parks and Wildlife Service
ensure that hunters have appropriate deer hunting licences.

**Open season for deer hunting in Ireland** **Type of deer** |  **Hunting period** |  **Where in the State**  
---|---|---  
Male Fallow Deer  |  1 August to 30 April  |  All counties   
Female and Antlerless Fallow Deer  |  1 November to 31 March  |  All counties   
Male Sika Deer  |  1 August to 30 April  |  All counties   
Female and Antlerless Sika Deer  |  1 November to 31 March  |  All counties   
Male Red Deer  |  1 August to 30 April  |  All counties except Kerry   
Female and Antlerless Red Deer  |  1 November to 31 March  |  All counties except Kerry   
Muntjac Deer  |  1 September to 31 August  |  All counties   
  
##  Rules for a deer hunting licence

You need a licence to hunt deer in Ireland and can only hunt them for the
period on your licence. The penalties for hunting deer without a licence
include fines, imprisonment, or both.

To apply for a deer hunting licence you must:

  * Be over 16 years old 
  * Sign a declaration verifying that you will only hunt on land where you have permission (set out in Section 28 of the Wildlife Act). 
  * Provide your firearm (gun) details. The legal minimum requirement for a firearm to hunt deer is .220 calibre, with a muzzle energy of more than 1,700 foot pounds, which uses bullets of no less than 55 grain weight. 

You can apply for a licence during the open or closed season but you can only
hunt deer when permitted.

###  Mandatory certified deer hunting training

If you are applying for the first time for a deer hunting licence, you must
prove that you have attended and completed a certified deer hunting training
course. You can find [ more information on npws.ie
](https://www.npws.ie/licencesandconsents/hunting/deer-hunting-
licences-2021-2022/mandatory-certification-deer-hunters) .

###  Deer hunting licence

Your deer hunting licence has the following information:

  * Your name and address 
  * Your photograph 
  * Licence number 
  * Information about the Wildlife Act 1976 (as amended) 

It is an offence to tamper with a deer hunting licence and the penalties for
doing this can be fines or imprisonment or both. You must produce your licence
if a Garda or NPWS conservation officer asks for it.

###  Firearms

All firearms (guns) in Ireland must be registered and licensed. You must give
details of your firearm when you submit your application for a deer hunting
licence. Firearms certificates for weapons to hunt deer are issued by the
Garda Commissioner through your local Garda station. There are important
restrictions on the use and discharge of these dangerous weapons.

Before your local Garda√≠ issue a firearms certificate, they may ask for the
following:

  * Evidence that there is adequate security in your home for a gun 
  * Your [ land folio numbers ](https://www.landregistryireland.com/) (if the weapon is to be discharged on your land) 
  * Your deer hunting licence 

You must meet the requirements [ if you are visiting from another country
](http://www.justice.ie/en/JELR/Pages/Non-residents_Shooting_In_Ireland) and
importing a firearm for sporting purposes.

You must ensure that you have the appropriate deer hunting licence and a
firearm of the appropriate calibre. You can be prosecuted for hunting deer
with an inappropriate firearm or by any other means.

##  Cost of a deer hunting licence

There is no charge for a deer hunting licence.

##  How to apply for a deer hunting licence

For the 2024-2025 season, you apply online to renew or apply for a deer
hunting licence through the [ licensing portal
](https://portal.heritage.gov.ie/en-US/SignIn) . To get your licence in time
for the new season, you must apply before the end of June. The licence will be
issued in August.

You must [ register for the portal
](https://www.npws.ie/sites/default/files/files/registering-for-heritage-
licensing-portal.pdf) and create a profile. To do this, you must have a:

  * Valid email address 
  * Mobile phone number 
  * Digital photograph 

If you have a [ MyGov.ID ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-government-
works/egovernment/mygovid/) you can use this to log into the portal.

If you have a query about registering on the portal, you can email [
heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie ](mailto:heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie)

If you are renewing a licence, you must provide information about the deer you
shot last season, called your deer returns. You can find out more about [
renewing a licence (pdf)
](https://www.npws.ie/sites/default/files/files/submitting-a-deer-hunting-
licence-renewal-application.pdf) .

If you are applying for a licence for the first time, you must provide
relevant information such as:

  * Firearms certificate details 
  * Certification of deer hunting training 

If you are coming from abroad and you do not have an Irish firearms
certificate, you should upload an EU Firearms Pass or the equivalent from your
country of origin to satisfy the requirement to hold a licence to own and
operate a firearm. These will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis during the
application assessment.

The National Parks and Wildlife Service will examine your application,
together with the landowner's permission. Incomplete applications are not
considered.

If your licence is approved, you get a digital licence. A copy of the licence
is emailed to you and is also available on the [ portal
](https://portal.heritage.gov.ie/en-US/SignIn) .

**Updates**

During the year, you can update your details on the portal and add details of
the deer you shot (deer returns).

**Queries about licences**

If you have a deer hunting licence query, you can call 01 888 3242 or email [
deerlicences@npws.gov.ie ](mailto:deerlicences@npws.gov.ie) . If you have a
query about registering on the portal, you can email [
heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie ](mailto:heritage.licensing@housing.gov.ie)
.

The NPWS has published [ frequently asked questions (FAQs) about deer hunting
licences (pdf) ](https://www.npws.ie/sites/default/files/files/deer-hunting-
licence-application-faqs.pdf) .

You can get [ further information on applying for a licence from npws.ie
](http://www.npws.ie/licences/hunting/deer-hunting-licences) .

##  Where to apply

###  Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage

Wildlife Licensing Unit  
National Parks and Wildlife Service  
90 King Street North  
Dublin 7  
D07 N7CV

**Tel:** (01) 888 2000

**Homepage:** [ http://www.npws.ie/ ](http://www.npws.ie/)

**Email:** [ deerlicences@npws.gov.ie ](mailto:deerlicences@npws.gov.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/deer-
licences/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Deer%20hunting%20licences&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/deer-
licences/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/sport-and-leisure/deer-licences/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Deer%20hunting%20licences&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/deer-licences/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Foreign driving licences in Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-permit/)

How to exchange a driving licence issued in another country for an Irish
driving licence, including information on the fees and a list of recognised
exchange countries.

1643.9729

  * [ _Dog licences and ownership_ ](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/control-of-dogs/)

Rules on owning and control your dogs in Ireland. Includes licensing,
microchipping and restrictions for certain breeds.

1487.3341

  * [ _Boat licences and safety regulations_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/licensing-of-boats-and-watercraft-in-ireland/)

If you want to operate a boat or watercraft in Ireland, there are certain
rules you need to follow. Find out if you need a boat licence and what safety
equipment you may need.

1403.2035

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

