**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Cycling ](/en/travel-and-recreation/cycling/) > Cycle to Work
Scheme

#  Cycle to Work Scheme

  * What is the Cycle to Work Scheme? 
  * How do I save money on the Cycle to Work Scheme? 
  * How much can I spend on the Cycle to Work Scheme, and how often can I use it? 
  * How often can I do the scheme? 
  * What are the different kinds of bikes covered? 
  * What if my employer buys me a bike and doesn’t charge me for it? 
  * What equipment does the Cycle to Work Scheme cover? 
  * Step-by-step guide for an employee 
  * If you are an employer 

##  What is the Cycle to Work Scheme?

Under the Cycle to Work Scheme (also known as the Bike to Work Scheme), you
can get a new bike tax free through your work. Your employer pays for a new
bike and then you repay the cost of regular instalments from your gross
(overall) salary.

You do not have to pay [ tax, PRSI or the Universal Social Charge
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-
tax-is-calculated/) on your repayments.

Not every employer takes part in the scheme. However, if they do, they must
offer it to all their employees.

If you are self-employed, you cannot take part in the Cycle to Work Scheme
unless you pay PRSI as an employee in addition to your self-employed work.

##  How do I save money on the Cycle to Work Scheme?

As an employee, you save on the costs of cycling to work because your
repayments come out of your salary before tax, USC and PRSI are deducted. This
means that someone on the highest rate of tax will save almost half of the
cost of a new bike and equipment.

###

##  How much can I spend on the Cycle to Work Scheme, and how often can I use
it?

There are 3 limits depending on the type of bike you bought.

The limit (including related safety equipment) is:

  * €3,000 for cargo and ecargo bikes. 
  * €1,500 for pedelecs and e-bikes. 
  * €1,250 for other bikes. 

From 1 August 2020 to 31 December 2022 the limit for cargo bikes was €1,250
and the limit for ecargo bikes was €1,500.

##  How often can I do the scheme?

As an employee, you can use the scheme once every 4 years. The four-year span
between tax breaks is counted by tax year. If you bought a bike anytime in
2020, you can buy a new bike and receive the next tax relief in January 2024.

##  What are the different kinds of bikes covered?

A cargo bike has a special purpose frame to carry heavy loads or other
passengers. A container or a platform may be integrated into, or attached to,
this frame in front of, or behind, the rider.

An ecargo bike is a cargo bike with a pedelec configuration. A bike cannot be
converted into a cargo bike by simply attaching a container or a trailer. The
frame must be specially designed to carry large or heavy loads or passengers.

##  What if my employer buys me a bike and doesn’t charge me for it?

That is acceptable. Under the scheme, you will not be taxed for benefit in
kind if you receive a bike from your employer if the cost of the bike and
equipment is not over the limit for the bike.

##  What equipment does the Cycle to Work Scheme cover?

The scheme covers new bikes and equipment (not second-hand). This includes:

New bikes and pedelecs (electrically assisted bikes that require some effort
to propel)

  * Cycle helmets 
  * Bells and bulb horns 
  * Lights (including dynamo packs) 
  * Mirrors 
  * Mudguards and skirt guards 
  * Cycle clips 
  * Panniers, luggage carriers and straps 
  * Locks and chains 
  * Pumps 
  * Puncture repair kits, cycle tool kits and tyre sealant 
  * Reflective clothing 
  * Bike reflectors 

###  **What is not included?**

Child seats, helmets and trailers are not included.

The scheme does not include motorbikes, mopeds, scooters, second-hand bikes,
equipment, bike parts or associated equipment.

##  Step-by-step guide for an employee

###  **Step 1: Check with the employer**

Ask your employer if they run the scheme and check their requirements. They
may allow you to select the bike and equipment from any shop or only certain
bikes from specific shops.

If you are a civil or public servant, the cycle shop must be on the [
suppliers' list (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/205289/f971c984-969b-41f3-9fc5-d2e6f4a6b141.pdf) .

###  **Step 2: Choose your bike with the supplier**

You can choose your bike by visiting a bike shop and selecting the bike and
equipment that you want to buy.

###  **Step 3: Inform your employer of your choice and they pay for the bike
directly**

Tell your employer of this choice. The employer will then pay the bike shop or
supplier for the bike and equipment directly.

###  **Step 4: Sign an agreement with your employer**

You must sign a written agreement stating that the bike is for your own use,
and that you will use it what [ Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-
pensions/taxation-of-employer-benefits/cycle-to-work-scheme.aspx) consider
qualifying journeys: getting to and from work.

###  **Step 5: You repay your employer in instalments**

Your employer then sets up salary deductions over an agreed period of up to 12
months to recover the costs.

Depending on your salary arrangements, these deductions can be made weekly,
fortnightly or monthly.

**Do not pay for the bike directly**

Please note that your employer must pay for the bike. The tax exemption does
not apply if you pay for the bike and your employer reimburses you.

##  If you are an employer

###  **Step 1: Decide to take part in the scheme**

As an employer, you can decide whether to take part in the scheme, as taking
part is voluntary. If you do, the scheme must be made available to all
employees.

###  **Step 2: Pay the supplier**

The employer must pay the supplier directly, once an employee chooses a bike
and accessories. If the employee has already paid, the employer cannot refund
them.

###  **Step 3: Set up salary deductions**

After buying the bike, the employer recovers the cost by deducting instalments
from the employee’s gross salary. These deductions can be spread over up to 12
months. They can be made weekly, fortnightly, or monthly, depending on how the
employee is paid.

###  **Step 4: Ensure tax compliance**

The employer makes tax savings possible for the employee by making deductions
before tax, PRSI, and USC are applied.

###  **Step 5: Get a written agreement**

The employer must make sure that the employee signs a written agreement
confirming that the bike will be used primarily for commuting to and from
work.

Note: If an employer provides the bike for free, and the cost stays within the
scheme's limits, the employee will not be taxed on the benefit in kind.

_**Page edited:** 11 September 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/cycle-to-work-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Cycle%20to%20Work%20Scheme&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/cycle-to-work-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/cycling/cycle-to-work-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Cycle%20to%20Work%20Scheme&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/cycling/cycle-to-work-scheme/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [
](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Pathways to work - schemes and initiatives_ ](/en/employment/unemployment-and-redundancy/employment-support-schemes/schemes-to-support-employment/)

Overview of the employment schemes and other supports which encourage people
getting unemployment and certain other social welfare payments to take up
employment.

2057.9265

  * [ _Coming from the EU/EEA to work_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-from-eu-to-work/)

Details the rights of EU/EEA nationals to come to Ireland to work, and covers
rights while working.

1772.5955

  * [ _Help to Buy Scheme_ ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/help-to-buy-scheme/)

The Help to Buy Scheme offers a tax refund for first-time buyers of newly-
built homes.

1631.3204

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

