**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Motoring ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/) > [ Driving
tests ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-tests/) > Driver theory
test

#  Driver theory test

  * Introduction 
  * How to apply for a driver theory test 
  * Preparing for the test 
  * How the test works 
  * Getting your result 
  * Applicants with reading or language difficulties 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

The first step to learning to drive in Ireland is to pass the driver theory
test.

The theory test is a computer-based exam of motoring theory appropriate to [
the category of vehicle ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-
licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/)
you want to be licenced to drive. It checks your knowledge of:

  * The [ rules of the road ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/road-safety/rules-of-the-road.pdf?sfvrsn=e0334acb_0)
  * Risk perception 
  * Eco-driving 
  * Hazard awareness 
  * Good driving behaviour 

You can take the driver theory test at any one of the [ test centres (pdf)
](https://theorytest.ie/wp-content/uploads/theory-test-ireland-test-centre-
location-map-051017.pdf) located around the country. While the test is
computer-based, it is designed to be user-friendly for people who have little
experience of using computers. The test can be done in Irish and English and [
candidates with special needs are catered for ](https://theorytest.ie/general-
information/test-day-assistance-support/) .

If you pass the test, you get a theory test certificate. You can then apply
for a [ learner permit ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-
licensing/learner-driving-permits-for-cars-and-work-vehicles/) and begin
learning to drive on Irish roads.

Read more about the [ steps involved in getting an Irish driving licence
](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/learning-to-drive/) .

##  How to apply for a driver theory test

You can [ apply and pay for your driver theory test online
](http://www.theorytest.ie/driver-theory-test/schedule-test/) . Applying
online is the quickest way to book a theory test. The [ application form (pdf)
](https://theorytest.ie/wp-content/uploads/theory-test-ireland-dtt-
application-form-cars-bikes-110918.pdf) is also available from the testing
service and NDLS centres. You can also [ book a test by phone or by post
](https://theorytest.ie/general-information/contact-us/) .

When your application has been received, you will receive notification of the
date, location, and time of your test in advance.

It is possible to [ re-schedule or cancel a theory test online
](http://www.theorytest.ie/driver-theory-test/reschedule-or-cancel-your-test/)
or you can [ contact the call centre ](https://theorytest.ie/general-
information/contact-us/) to do so. If you do not arrive at the Test Centre in
time for your test appointment or cancel your test in less than 5 business
days ( including 3 full business days) before your test date, you will lose
your test fee.

###  **Cost**

The cost of a driver theory test is as follows:

**Driver theory cost** Category A or B  |  €45   
---|---  
Category C or D  |  €72   
Category CD  |  €84   
Module TMT or BMT  |  €45   
  
###  Identification

The RSA has published a [ list of acceptable forms of identification
](https://theorytest.ie/book-your-theory-test/driver-theory-test-car-or-bike/)
you must show on the day of your theory test to be able to take the exam.
Failure to produce the correct identification will result in you not being
able to test and you will lose your test fee.

While you can legally take a driver theory test at any age, [ your pass
certificate ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/the-driving-
test/after-you-pass-your-test) is only valid for 2 years, and you cannot get a
learner permit to drive any kind of vehicle in a public place in Ireland until
you are at least 16 years of age.

###  Categories of vehicle

When applying to take a theory test, you will be asked to indicate the
category of vehicle you wish to be tested for. The [ categories of test
](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-
vehicles-and-minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/) are:

  * A – motorcycles and mopeds (Driving licence categories AM, A1, A2, A), 
  * B – cars, tractors and work vehicles (Driving licence categories B, BE, W) 
  * C – vans and trucks over 3,500kg (Driving licence categories C, C1, CE, C1E) 
  * D – buses (Driving licence categories D, D1, DE, D1E) 
  * CD – trucks and buses (Driving licence categories C, C1, CE, C1E, D, D1, DE, D1E) 
  * TMT – truck module (must have passed D test) 
  * BMT – bus module (must have passed C test) 

Categories A, B, C and D tests are available in Irish. If you want to complete
your test in the Irish language, you must indicate that when booking your
test.

If you already have a driving licence for a particular category and you want
to get a driving licence for a different category for which a different theory
test is required, you have to pass the theory test for that category before
you can [ apply for a learner permit ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/learner-driving-permits-for-cars-and-
work-vehicles/) .

For example, if you have a driving licence for a car (category B) and you want
to get a driving licence for a van or truck (category C1), you must pass the
category C theory test and then apply for a category C1 learner permit.

If you pass a category C or D theory test, there is an option to sit a TMT or
BMT module test to get the other category (D or C as appropriate) provided
this is done within 2 years of the first test.

Read more about [ categories of vehicles and learner permits ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-minimum-
age-of-drivers-in-ireland/) .

##  Preparing for the test

The questions you will be asked in your driver theory test are based on the [
Rules of the Road (pdf) ](https://www.rsa.ie/docs/default-source/road-
safety/rules-of-the-road.pdf?sfvrsn=e0334acb_0) and current road traffic
legislation.

The Driver Theory Testing Service has a bank of questions. For each test, a
random selection of questions will be used from the question bank. The test is
continually updated depending on new and revised legislation.

###  Learning materials

Using official RSA revision materials gives you the best chance of passing the
first time. You can buy learning portal subscriptions, books and CD-ROMs on
the [ theory test website ](https://dttstore.prometric.com/) .

###  **Changes to revision materials in July 2024**

There is a [ new revision edition in July 2024
](https://theorytest.ie/revision-material/) .

  * If you are taking the driver theory test on or after July 1, 2024, use the May 2024 edition of the test questions. 

Some public libraries also stock this material. Contact [ your local public
library ](http://www.library.ie/public/index.shtml) to see if you can borrow
these items.

##  How the test works

The test is computer based and can be taken using either a touch screen or a
mouse and keyboard. You do not need to be computer literate to take the test.

The first part of the exam is a short tutorial, which includes instructions on
how to navigate through the exam. It also lets you practice answering 2
questions.

The format of the test is multiple choice questions. Answers are marked with a
square box beside them and you tick one to choose your answer.

If you make a mistake or change your mind, you can cancel your answer. You can
skip a question if you like, and go back and answer it at the end of your
test. Before you finish the exam, you can review all your answers and change
them.

The [ RSA has published a video to illustrate what you can expect on the day
of your theory test ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rXALrEep8LU) .

###  Motorcycle and car tests

There are 40 questions in the category A and B tests and you have to answer 35
questions correctly to be successful. You have 45 minutes to answer the 40
questions in the test. You can find out more from [ theorytest.ie
](https://theorytest.ie/book-your-theory-test/driver-theory-test-car-or-bike/)
.

###  Truck and bus tests

There are 100 questions in the category C and D tests and you have to answer
74 questions correctly. You have 120 minutes to answer the questions.

To pass the combined CD theory test, you have 180 minutes to correctly answer
104 out of 140 questions. To pass a truck (TMT) or bus (BMT) module theory
test you have 45 minutes to answer 30 out of 40 questions correctly.

You can find out more from [ theorytest.ie ](https://theorytest.ie/book-your-
theory-test/driver-theory-test-bus-or-truck/) .

##  Getting your result

The test is scored automatically and results are available to you immediately.
If you are successful, you will receive a pass certificate for your theory
test at the test centre. You can then [ apply for a learner permit
](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring-1/driver-licensing/learner-driving-
permits-for-cars-and-work-vehicles#l1702f) .

Regardless of whether you pass or fail, you will also be provided with a score
report listing the categories recommended for further study, based on your
performance.

###  Appealing your result

If you are unhappy with the result of your theory test, you have the right to
appeal this decision.

To appeal, you should speak to the driver theory test supervisor before
leaving the test centre. You can also fill out an appeal form, which is
available at every test centre. You can also phone the candidate services team
to request a rescore of you driver theory test by calling 0818 606 106.

You must make your appeal within 10 working days of your test. When your
appeal is received, your test will be re-marked and you will receive the
result within 5 to 10 working days. The fee for appealing is €15 which is
refunded if successful.

If the original marking was incorrect, you will be issued with your new theory
test certificate. You can read more about the [ Driver Theory Test Customer
Charter ](https://theorytest.ie/general-information/policy-and-customer-
charter/) .

###  Replacing a lost driver theory test certificate

You no longer need to present your pass certificate at the NDLS centres. You
can complete your NDLS appointment without a physical copy of the score
report. If you have lost your score report, the NDLS agents will have access
to an online version of your result.

##  Applicants with reading or language difficulties

There are various [ options to assist you if you have special reading needs
](https://theorytest.ie/general-information/test-day-assistance-support/) .

  * If you have any difficulty with reading, there is a voiceover option that will read out the questions and answers. 
  * A reader recorder service can be provided where a staff member will read the questions and answers to you and record your answer on the computer. 
  * Translator supported tests are available by special arrangement in certain test centres if you do not understand Irish or English. 
  * If you have dyslexia, you can book the self-service dyslexia support. You book this when making your appointment for a car theory test. This service includes a PDF with alternative words and phrases. It also has an English voiceover. You can book an in-person assistance option, by phone 0818 606 106. It is available in limited test centers. 
  * You can request Irish Sign Language video clips by calling 0818 606 106. 
  * You can request an Irish Sign Language interpreter by calling 0818 606 106. 

There is an option on the [ theory test application form (pdf)
](https://theorytest.ie/wp-content/uploads/theory-test-ireland-dtt-
application-form-cars-bikes-110918.pdf) to tick if you need special
arrangements to take your test. You will need to provide medical evidence from
a school, doctor, or employer on headed paper together with the application
form.

###  Translator and voiceover services

You can get voiceover services in the following languages:

  * Arabic 
  * Polish 
  * Irish 
  * Romanian 
  * Portuguese 
  * Brazilian 
  * Lithuanian 
  * Russian 

If you need help in another language, you must complete the [ declaration form
(pdf) ](https://theorytest.ie/wp-content/uploads/dtt-interpreter-declaration-
form.pdf) . You must have it signed by an approved signatory. See the
declaration form for a list of approved signatories. When you have the
declaration form completed, you can [ make a request online for a translator
](https://fs6.formsite.com/Prometric/form31/index.html) .

Allow up to 25 working days for your request. You should only apply if you are
ready to test within this time. A care specialist will contact you by email to
offer you a test date. You must phone and pay within 3 business days of the
offer to secure your booking. If you do not, your application will be closed
and you will need to reapply.

##  Further information

###  Driver Theory Test

P.O. Box 15  
Dundalk  
Co. Louth  
Ireland

**Locall:** 0818 606 106 (Lo-call rate) Monday-Friday 8.00am-6.00pm.

**Homepage:** [ http://www.theorytest.ie/index.php
](http://www.theorytest.ie/index.php)

_**Page edited:** 2 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driver-theory-
test/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Driver%20theory%20test&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driver-theory-
test/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driver-theory-
test/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Driver%20theory%20test&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driver-theory-
test/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Steps to becoming a professional bus or truck driver_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/steps-to-becoming-a-professional-bus-or-truck-driver/)

Find out how to become a professional bus or truck driver in Ireland.

1115.6555

  * [ _Cash income not included in the means test_ ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-social-welfare-means-test/)

This page lists the income from cash not included in the means test for social
welfare payments.

962.138

  * [ _Tax relief for drivers and passengers with disabilities_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-disabled-passengers/)

The Disabled Drivers and Disabled Passengers Scheme provides a range of tax
reliefs for disabled drivers and disabled passengers.

888.7763

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

