**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Air travel ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/) > Air
passenger rights in the European Union

#  Air passenger rights in the European Union

  * Introduction 
  * Travel agents and your flight information 
  * Check-in and boarding (flight overbooked) 
  * Passengers with reduced mobility 
  * Data protection 
  * Liability in the event of an accident 
  * Making a complaint 

##  Introduction

Under EU and Irish law, you have certain rights when travelling by air with
European airlines. All European airlines, travel agents, tour operators and
businesses providing air transport services must observe your rights.

This means that you have specific rights in relation to the following:

  * Access to information about flights and reservations 
  * Obligations of travel agents 
  * Liability in the event of loss of baggage or accidents 
  * Compensation for overbooked flights 

##  Travel agents and your flight information

You have the right to neutral and accurate information when booking a flight
through a travel agent. In other words, your travel agent must supply you with
objective information (for example information that does not favour one
airline over another or selective information about availability). If a travel
agent is using an online reservation system, they should remain impartial
until you suggest a preference or give the travel agent an option. This means
your travel agent must supply information on all of the following options (in
this order):

  * Non-stop flights (flights that travel directly from one point to your destination) 
  * Flights with intermediate stops (flights that operate with a stop-over and then proceed to your destination) 
  * Connecting flights (a journey made up of two or more flights before you reach your destination) 
  * All the available fares from various airlines 

When you book your ticket, your travel agent must pass on all of the
information available including:

  * The airline that will provide the service (if this is different from the airline mentioned on your ticket) 
  * Changes of aircraft that may occur during your journey 
  * Details of stops during your journey 
  * Transfers between airports that may occur during your journey 

If you are travelling as part of a package holiday, the travel organiser must
give you all of the essential information about the holiday before you agree
to the contract. You can read more about rights in our page on [ package
holidays and linked travel arrangements ](/en/consumer/travel/package-
holidays/) .

##  Check-in and boarding (flight overbooked)

If the flight is overbooked and you are told you cannot board the aircraft,
you will be entitled to compensation under EU law.

However this only applies if:

  * You have a valid ticket and you have confirmed your reservation 
  * You have presented yourself at check-in at the airport within the time specified by the airline 

You can read more about [ compensation for overbooked, cancelled and delayed
flights in the EU ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-travel/compensation-for-
overbooked-and-delayed-flights/) .

##  Passengers with reduced mobility

You have the right to assistance, free of charge.

This can include:

  * Help with your luggage 
  * Getting on and off the plane 
  * During the flight 
  * In airports before and after your flight 

You should contact your airline at least 48 hours before your trip and explain
what assistance you need.

Airlines and tour operators cannot refuse to carry passengers (or take
bookings), on the basis of reduced mobility. However, this only applies to
flights from airports in the EU.

Under [ Regulation (EC) No 1107/2006
](http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/transport/mobility_and_passenger_rights/l24132_en.htm)
, a reservation or boarding can only be refused for justified safety reasons.
This also includes if the boarding or transport of a person with a disability
or reduced mobility is physically impossible, either due to the size of the
aircraft or its doors. If a person is refused a reservation, an acceptable
alternative must be offered. If boarding is refused, the person must be
offered either a refund or an alternative flight. Airport authorities must
provide assistance without extra cost to the person concerned, but it may levy
a charge on all passengers.

Other provisions under this Regulation include the following:

  * On flights from EU airports, airlines must provide certain services, such as carrying wheelchairs or guide dogs, free of charge. 
  * Both airport authorities and airlines must provide training to their staff, so that those providing direct assistance to people with disabilities and reduced mobility should know how to meet their needs. All staff working at the airport should be provided with disability equality and awareness training. 

More information is available from the [ Irish Aviation Authority (IAA)
](https://www.flightrights.ie/your-rights/reduced-mobility/) .

##  Data protection

Passengers who book flights in the EU have the right to know about any of
their personal details which are being held or stored. They have a right to
know what this information is to be used for and who is in control of this
information. When your travel agent is making an online reservation on your
behalf, they must tell you why the information is necessary, how long it is
being stored for, which staff member is dealing with your booking and how to
contact the organisation. Anybody who requests this information must be given
free [ access to their personal details that are being stored
](/en/government-in-ireland/data-protection/rights-under-general-data-
protection-regulation/) . The Data Protection Commission has been established
to [ uphold your rights to your personal information
](http://www.dataprivacy.ie/) .

##  Liability in the event of an accident

There is no financial limit on the liability of an EU airline for damages
sustained in the event of death, wounding or any other bodily injury. For
damages up to 128, 821 Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), the airline cannot
contest claims for compensation.

[ Special Drawing Rights (SDR)
](http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/sdr.htm) are a mix of currency
values established by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The [ current
value of an SDR in Euro is available on the IMF's website
](http://www.imf.org/external/np/fin/data/rms_mth.aspx?reportType=CVSDR) . The
liability limits are reviewed every 5 years. Find out more about an airline's
liability following the death or injury of a passenger, or damage or loss of
luggage in our [ page on airline liability ](/en/travel-and-recreation/air-
travel/airline-liability/) .

##  Making a complaint

If you have a complaint about the assistance and compensation you have
received for denied boarding or cancelled or delayed flights, you must begin
by contacting your airline directly.

If you feel your rights have not been met and you have not received the level
of treatment or compensation to which you are entitled, you should contact the
[ Irish Aviation Authority ](https://www.iaa.ie/consumer-protection/air-
passenger-rights) or the [ Competition and Consumer Protection Commission
(CCPC) ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/how-to-
complain/?gclid=CjwKCAiAxJSPBhAoEiwAeO_fPyW7ZWJmIeB7fpAALP1CX3IRu4eX3AfPTtIUAbFW1_xPr4cQCTElPhoCwQgQAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds)
and make a complaint. You can also contact the Directorate-General for
Transport and Energy of the European Commission.

_**Page edited:** 8 May 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-
eu/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Air%20passenger%20rights%20in%20the%20European%20Union&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-
eu/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-
eu/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Air%20passenger%20rights%20in%20the%20European%20Union&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/air-travel/air-passenger-rights-in-the-
eu/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Council of the European Union_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/council-of-the-european-union/)

The Council of the European Union consists of one government minister from
every member state. The Council is part of the law making process in the
European Union.

1358.9092

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

1240.1028

  * [ _Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)_ ](/en/government-in-ireland/european-government/eu-institutions/european-court-of-justice/)

The Court of Justice of the European Union ensures that European law is
interpreted and applied in each member state. Find out about the other
important functions of this court.

1209.4241

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

