**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Traffic and parking ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-
parking/) > Parking fees, fines and vehicle clamping

#  Parking fees, fines and vehicle clamping

  * Introduction 
  * Rules 
  * Rates 
  * Parking laws 
  * How to make a complaint or appeal 

##  Introduction

A system of parking fees, restrictions, fines and clamping is in place in
towns and cities in Ireland. This is to stop illegal parking, which can block
other motorists or businesses.

Traffic wardens and an [ Garda Síochána ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/garda-
siochana-national-police-force/) are responsible for enforcing laws relating
to illegal parking. Your local authority is responsible for creating bye-laws
that list the public places in your area where parking fees will be in place.
It also decides the cost of parking fees.

Parking fees vary in Ireland and can be set and adjusted by your local
authority.

##  Rules

Most [ local authority ](http://www.housing.gov.ie/local-
government/administration/local-authorities/local-authorities) websites have
details of parking restrictions and the type of pay parking in their area. You
can also get details of car park locations, rates, and the location of
disabled parking spaces. Alternatively, you can contact the relevant local
authority to get these details.

###  Paying for parking

The way you pay for parking varies, depending on where you park. There are
signs in areas where you must pay giving details of when you must pay for
parking and the maximum time you can park there. Payment methods include:

  * **Pay and display** : this lets you pay for parking by using a meter. Hourly prices vary depending on where you park. 
  * **Parking tag** : this lets you pay for parking using your mobile device. This service is available in certain pay-and-display areas. More information is available at [ parkingtag.ie ](https://www.parkingtag.ie/) . 
  * **Parkbytext** : lets you pay for parking in [ specific locations ](https://www.apcoaconnect.ie/locations) using your mobile device. Read more about [ how it works ](https://www.apcoaconnect.ie/howitworks) on apcoaconnect.ie. 
  * **Disc parking** : lets you pay for parking by buying a parking disc in a participating newsagents or shop. The disc should be displayed clearly on your windscreen. This service runs in some cities and smaller towns. 

###  Permit parking

If there is on-street parking in operation on the street where you live, you
can get a resident's permit from the traffic division of your [ local
authority
](http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government_in_ireland/local_and_regional_government/local_authorities.html)
to park there. Your permit identifies the name of your street and varies in
price depending on your location. Each car owner can be issued with one
permit, and no more than four permits are issued to applicants of any one
household. If you live in a house that has been divided up into more than one
unit of accommodation, you are only entitled to one parking permit per unit.
Residents of purpose built apartment blocks are not eligible for residents'
permits.

###  Private car parks

Private car parks are not regulated by the Government and revenue earned from
parking there goes directly to the owners of the car parks. The prices charged
in private car parks vary. Prices are determined by the car park owner. You
will usually be issued a ticket when you go into the car park and pay for
parking when you leave.

###  Parking restrictions

Parking is restricted during business hours in certain parts of most towns and
cities. During these hours, you are not allowed to obstruct clearways, bus
lanes and loading zones. Parking signs on these streets will clearly display
the hours that restrictions are in operation. Disabled parking spaces are off
limits at all times, unless you have an appropriate permit. See our page on [
Parking Permits for Disabled Drivers ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-
parking/disabled-persons-parking-card/) .

###  Parking fines

There is a system of fines in place for illegal parking and non-payment of
parking fees. You get a parking ticket when you have been issued a fine.

If you get a parking fine, you must pay the fine to the traffic division of
the local authority within 28 days of the date of the fixed charge notice. If
you fail to pay within the allotted 28 days, the charge increases by 50%. If
the fine is unpaid after a further 28 days, court proceedings are initiated.
Details of where you can pay your parking fine should be written on your
parking ticket. If you fail to pay your parking fine and aren’t formally
appealing the fine, you can be prosecuted.

###  Penalty points

Some parking offences incur penalty points. For example, if you are convicted
of parking dangerously, you will receive 5 penalty points and a fine. Read
more about the [ penalty points system ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/penalty-points-for-driving-offences/) .

###  Vehicle clamping

Vehicle clamping is in operation in some areas. Clamping services are run by
private companies on behalf of the local authority. Employees of the vehicle
clamping company can clamp vehicles and issue clamping notices for vehicles
that violate the parking regulations. The [ National Transport Authority
](https://www.nationaltransport.ie/) is responsible for the regulation of
clamping.

###  Tow-away system

Local authorities are allowed to tow-away vehicles that have been abandoned or
illegally parked on a public road or in a local authority car park. Vehicles
are towed to a car pound and you may be charged a significant fee for their
release. If you think your car has been towed away, you should contact the
local authority responsible for the area where you parked.

###  A motorist from other countries

Under a cross-border project with Northern Ireland, motorists from Northern
Ireland who fail to pay parking fees or toll charges here can be pursued. The
Driver and Vehicle Agency in Northern Ireland will forward the motorist's
details to the appropriate local authority for parking offences or [ Transport
Infrastructure Ireland (TII) ](http://www.tii.ie/) for tolls. Similarly, if
you fail to pay a parking fee or toll in Northern Ireland, your details can be
passed to the authorities in Northern Ireland.

Motorists from other countries such as Poland, France or Germany can be
pursued for non-payment of tolls through a separate arrangement which
Transport Infrastructure Ireland has with these countries. It uses the
services of a specialist parking and tolling enforcement agency.

##  Rates

Different fines apply depending on where your car has been ticketed, clamped
or towed away from. The cost of the fine also depends on whether you have
parked in a _statutory area_ or a _non-statutory area_ .

A _statutory area_ is an area under the direction of a local authority.
Examples of statutory areas include public roads, airports and harbours.

A _non-statutory area_ is an area not under the direction of a local
authority. This includes private car parks and private residential parking.

###  Rates in statutory areas (public road, airport, or harbour)

If you commit a parking offence in a statutory area, you may get a fine, have
your vehicle clamped, or have your vehicle impounded. There is a system of [
fixed charge fines ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/licensed-drivers/penalty-
points/types-of-offences) for illegal parking and other related offences.

###  Rates in non-statutory areas (private carpark or private residential
parking)

If you park your vehicle in a non-statutory area and fail to pay the relevant
parking fee, or your ticket has expired, your vehicle may be clamped. Your
vehicle may also be clamped if you breach the terms and conditions that apply
where you parked.

The maximum fees for clamping, re-locating and impounding vehicles in non-
statutory areas are:

Situation  |  Maximum fee   
---|---  
Where your vehicle has been clamped  |  €125   
Where your vehicle has been relocated within a clamping place  |  €50   
Where your vehicle has been relocated within a clamping place and clamped  |  €150   
Where your vehicle has been relocated to a pound  |  €150 and an additional €50 in respect of each additional day (or part thereof) the vehicle is situated in the pound.   
  
##  Parking laws

There are a number of Acts and regulations that govern parking and clamping
including:

  * The underlying legislation in relation to road traffic offences is generally the [ Road Traffic Acts 1961 (as amended) ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1961/act/24/revised/en/html) . 
  * [ Section 101B of the Road Traffic Act, 1961 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1961/act/24/section/101B/revised/en/html) : provides for vehicle clamping. 
  * [ The Road Traffic Act, 1994 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/1994/act/7/front/revised/en/html) : which gives local authorities the power to make bye-laws governing the type of paid parking controls in their areas, for example, disc parking or pay-and-display parking. 
  * [ The Road Traffic Act 2010 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2010/act/25/front/revised/en/html) : provides for the system of fixed-charge traffic and parking offences. 
  * [ The Vehicle Clamping Act, 2015 ](https://revisedacts.lawreform.ie/eli/2015/act/13/revised/en/html) : makes the National Transport Authority responsible for the regulation of clamping. 
  * [ The Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations, 1997 as amended ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/si/182/made/en/print) : provide for the general regulation and control of traffic, pedestrians and parking. 
  * [ The Road Traffic (Signs) Regulations 2024 (pdf) ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/200/made/en/pdf) : give local authorities responsibility for authorising regulatory traffic signs and designating areas where parking is restricted or prohibited. 
  * [ The Vehicle Clamping and Signing Regulations, 2017 (pdf) ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2017/si/421/made/en/pdf) : set the maximum fees for clamping, re-locating and impounding vehicles in certain areas. 
  * [ Road Traffic Act 2010 (Part 3) (Fixed Charge Offences) Regulations 2024 (pdf) ](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2024/si/227/made/en/pdf) : sets out the amount of certain fixed charge parking offences. 

##  How to make a complaint or appeal

###  Complaints

Vehicle clamping [ complaints can be made to the NTA using this form
](https://clampingregulation.nationaltransport.ie/Complaint/) .

###  If you want to appeal a clamping or relocation

If you are clamped and want to appeal the clamping or a relocation, you should
contact the parking controller. Information on the parking controller is
usually found on either the clamping notice or the receipt for payment of the
clamp release fee. You should give details of the situation and enclose any
documents that could help your case. Most complaints will be acknowledged
within a few days. Your appeal will be investigated and you should receive a
response within 21 days. If dissatisfied with the outcome of your appeal, you
may then be able to further appeal again to the [ National Transport Authority
(NTA) ](https://www.nationaltransport.ie/vehicle-clamping-regulation/) .

###  If you want to appeal a parking ticket

You can also appeal a parking ticket issued in a local authority area, if you
feel you have been fined unfairly. Take as much detail of the scene as you can
(photographs, details of road markings, etc.) and send them to the local
authority traffic division with your parking ticket and a letter outlining
your complaint.

Note that the NTA has no role in parking fine appeals, and these should be
addressed to the local authority.

_**Page edited:** 15 July 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-fines-and-vehicle-
clamping/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Parking%20fees%2C%20fines%20and%20vehicle%20clamping&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-fines-and-vehicle-
clamping/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-fines-and-vehicle-
clamping/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Parking%20fees%2C%20fines%20and%20vehicle%20clamping&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-fines-and-vehicle-
clamping/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Fines for criminal offences_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/fines-for-criminal-offences/)

Information on fines allowable for those summarily convicted in the District
Court or convicted on indictment in the Circuit Court or High Court.

1515.9121

  * [ _Categories of motor vehicles and minimum age of drivers_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-licensing/categories-of-motor-vehicles-and-minimum-age-of-drivers-in-ireland/)

Motor vehicles in Ireland are divided into different categories for driver
licensing purposes. Information is provide on categories of vehicles and the
minimum age you need to be in order to legally drive them.

1296.2854

  * [ _Monitoring and treatment of sex offenders in Ireland_ ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/sex-offenders-register/)

This document provides information about the treatment and monitoring of sex
offenders in Ireland. It includes detail on the sex offenders register, post-
release supervision orders, sex offender orders and the treatment of sex
offenders in prison.

1248.5898

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

