**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Sport and leisure ](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-
leisure/) > Walking and rambling in Ireland

#  Walking and rambling in Ireland

  * Introduction 
  * Irish walking trails 
  * Laws and restrictions 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

Walking and rambling trails have become very popular in recent times. There
are 3 main walking schemes for walking route developments:

  * The National Waymarked Trails Programme in Sport Ireland 
  * The Slí na Sláinte Scheme under the Irish Heart Foundation 
  * Coillte recreational forests. 

Make sure to prepare and plan your trip before you head out. You can get
guidance from [ Sports Ireland ](https://www.sportireland.ie/outdoors/trail-
advice-guidance) .

There are certain restrictions that apply to those walking or rambling – See
more in the ‘laws and restrictions’ below.

##  Irish walking trails

There are many walking trails throughout Ireland for you to enjoy.

You can find your nearest walking trail on:

  * [ Sport Ireland ](https://www.sportireland.ie/outdoors/walking/trails)
  * [ Slí na Sláinte ](https://irishheart.ie/your-health/our-health-programmes/healthy-communities/slainte/walking-routes/)
  * [ Coillteoutdoors ](https://www.coillte.ie/our-forests/recreation-map/?activity=walking-trails)
  * [ DiscoverIreland ](https://www.discoverireland.ie/things-to-do/walking-and-hiking)

###  Waymarked Trails

The [ National Trails Office (NTO) of Sport Ireland
](https://www.sportireland.ie/outdoors/find-your-trails) is responsible for
the Waymarked Trails in Ireland. There are over 40 National Waymarked Trails
around Ireland, including the Wicklow Way, Kerry Way, Burren Way, and there
are many shorter walks.

You can find [ Irish walking trails on the Sports Ireland website
](https://www.sportireland.ie/outdoors/walking/trails) .

Waymarked Trails are paths that are developed with the agreement and support
of landowners whose lands are crossed on the route. They are not necessarily
rights-of-way, although old roads and paths are used on many of these walking
routes, which are all waymarked and signposted.

The [ Walks Scheme ](https://www.gov.ie/en/policy-information/942b4b-the-
walks-scheme-and-rural-recreation-officers/#2021-review-of-the-walks-scheme)
is a national scheme, funded by the Department of Rural and Community
Development. Landholders can get a payment for the maintenance of the National
Waymarked Ways and priority trails that pass through their land. You can find
a [ list of walks and trails ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/af6a41-walks-
scheme-walks-and-trails/) that are available.

Fáilte Ireland's (the Irish Tourist Board's) website has [ information on
accommodation ](http://www.discoverireland.ie/Where-To-Stay/Accommodation-
Guide) .

###  Slí na Sláinte

[ Slí na Sláinte ](https://irishheart.ie/your-health/our-health-
programmes/healthy-communities/slainte/) , meaning "Path to Health", is a
scheme developed by the Irish Heart Foundation to encourage people of all ages
and abilities to walk for leisure and good health. For health benefits you
need to walk at a brisk pace for at least 30 minutes, 5 days a week. You can
accumulate 30 minutes or more over 2 or 3 shorter sessions.

It uses signage at kilometre intervals on established walking routes to help
walkers identify the distance they walk. The signs are not numbered so you can
start and finish at whatever kilometre sign you like.

You can view a [ list of Slí na Sláinte routes throughout Ireland
](https://irishheart.ie/your-health/our-health-programmes/healthy-
communities/slainte/) .

###  Coillte recreational forests

Coillte runs 12 forest parks around the country, most of which provide
facilities such as toilets, parking, picnic sites, playgrounds for children,
and a shop or restaurant (seasonal). Coillte also runs over 180 recreation
sites around the country, most of which provide basic facilities such as
parking, picnic sites and walking trails.

Find out more on [ coillteoutdoors.ie ](https://www.coillte.ie/our-
forests/explore/) .

###  Get Ireland Walking

The Get Ireland Walking initiative helps get more people out walking and gives
support to local walking groups. Find out more on [ getirelandwalking.ie
](https://www.getirelandwalking.ie/about-get-ireland-walking) . There is a
getirelandwalking app that you can download.

###  Hill walking clubs

You can find out about hill walking clubs near you on [ mountaineering.ie
](https://www.mountaineering.ie/) . There is information about walking groups
on [ getirelandwalking.ie ](https://www.getirelandwalking.ie/join-a-walking-
group) .

##  Laws and restrictions

###  Right of way

There is a distinction in Irish law between public and private [ rights of way
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/) . A public right of way
is a person's right of passage along a road or path, even if the road or path
is not in public ownership. There are very few registered public rights of way
that are not maintained on public roads.

A private right of way is the right to enter onto private lands, but only for
the purposes of gaining access to or exiting from another piece of land. It is
typically an arrangement between neighbours.

The waymarked trails are _permissive routes_ that have been developed with the
landowners’ agreement and are not rights of way.

###  Liability

The [ Occupiers' Liability Act 1995
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1995/en/act/pub/0010/index.html) , which
includes _recreational user_ s as a category of users of privately-owned
lands, was introduced to address the exposure of landowners to claims arising
from injuries to recreational users and others.

###  Extinguishing public rights of way

Under the [ Roads Act 1993
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1993/en/act/pub/0014/index.html) , it is the
responsibility of [ local authorities ](/en/government-in-ireland/how-
government-works/local-and-regional-government/functions-of-local-
authorities/) to protect the public's right to access public rights of way in
each local authority area. Local authorities can also extinguish public rights
of way. The procedure that must be followed, if they wish to extinguish a
public right of way, is set out in [ Section 73 of the Act
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1993/en/act/pub/0014/sec0073.html#sec73) .

The [ Planning and Development Acts 2000 to 2015
](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_2000_0030.HTM)
require local authorities to preserve existing public rights of way by mapping
and listing them as part of their county development plans. Under Part XIII of
the 2000 Act, they have the powers to create a public right of way.

###  Respecting private landowners' property

You should protect the environment when out walking. You should avoid causing
any disturbances to farm land. You can find more information on [
leavenotraceireland.org ](http://www.leavenotraceireland.org/) .

Under the [ Criminal Justice (Public Order) Act 1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0002/index.html) as amended
by [ Section 24 of the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2002
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2002/en/act/pub/0009/sec0024.html#partiii-
sec24) , it is a criminal offence for anyone to enter, occupy or bring
anything onto privately-owned land or land owned by local authorities if that
act is likely to:

  * Substantially damage the land. 
  * Substantially damage any amenity on the land or prevent any person from making reasonable use of that amenity. 
  * Render the land or any amenity on it unsanitary or unsafe. 
  * Substantially interfere with the land or an amenity on it. 

If a landowner believes that someone is illegally occupying their land to the
extent of committing one of the above offences, they should tell the [ Garda
Síochána ](http://www.garda.ie/Stations/Default.aspx) .

##  Further information

You can get information in the booklet [ Recreation in the Irish Countryside
(pdf) ](http://www.mountaineering.ie/_files/AccessLiability-
finalproof-29Aug2013.pdf) . Other useful websites are [ irishtrails.ie
](http://www.irishtrails.ie/) and [ Mountaineering Ireland
](https://www.mountaineering.ie/) .

Visit [ blueways Ireland ](https://www.bluewaysireland.org/what-are-the-
blueways) for walks around lakes, canals, and rivers. You can also get
information on our page on [ sporting activities for older people
](/en/travel-and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/go-for-life/) .

There are park runs held throughout the country, usually on Saturday mornings.
You can walk, jog, or run; it is up to you. See [ parkrun.ie
](https://www.parkrun.ie/) for more information.

###  Sport Ireland

Sport Ireland  
The Courtyard  
Sport Ireland Campus  
Snugborough Road  
Blanchardstown  
Dublin 15  
D15 PNON

**Tel:** (01) 860 8800

**Homepage:** [ http://www.sportireland.ie/ ](http://www.sportireland.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@sportireland.ie ](mailto:info@sportireland.ie)

###  Irish Heart Foundation

17-19 Rathmines Road Lower  
Dublin  
D06 C780

**Tel:** (01) 668 5001

**Fax:** (01) 668 5896

**Homepage:** [ http://www.irishheart.ie ](http://www.irishheart.ie)

**Email:** [ info@irishheart.ie ](mailto:info@irishheart.ie)

###  Mountaineering Ireland

Irish Sport HQ  
National Sports Campus  
Blanchardstown  
Dublin 15  
D15 DY62  
Ireland

**Tel:** +353 (0)1 6251115

**Fax:** +353 (0)1 6251116

**Homepage:** [ http://www.mountaineering.ie/ ](http://www.mountaineering.ie/)

**Email:** [ info@mountaineering.ie ](mailto:info@mountaineering.ie)

_**Page edited:** 24 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/walking-and-rambling-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Walking%20and%20rambling%20in%20Ireland&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/walking-and-rambling-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/sport-and-leisure/walking-and-rambling-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Walking%20and%20rambling%20in%20Ireland&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/sport-and-leisure/walking-and-rambling-in-
ireland/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Safety orders, protection orders and barring orders in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-in-marriages-and-other-relationships/barring-safety-and-protection-orders/)

Irish law provides protection for those living in violent or abusive
situations in the home. What are safety orders, protection orders and barring
orders and who can apply.

948.9526

  * [ _Residence rights of EU citizens and their families in Ireland_ ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/)

EEA nationals have the right to travel to Ireland and do not require a
residence permit to remain here. There are however some limits on these
rights.

851.0163

  * [ _Mental health services for children and young people in Ireland_ ](/en/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Find out what services are available for children and young people and how to
access them.

814.9157

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

