**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Traffic and parking ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-
parking/) > Disabled Person's Parking Card

#  Disabled Person's Parking Card

  * Introduction 
  * Check if you qualify 
  * How to apply and renew 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

You can apply for a parking permit to allow you to park in disabled parking
spaces in Ireland and the EU if you are a person with severe restricted
mobility or are certified as blind.

The permit is available if you are a driver or passenger of a vehicle. It is
valid for 2 years from the issue date.

The scheme is run in Ireland by the [ Disabled Drivers Association of Ireland
(DDAI) ](https://www.ddai.ie/parking-permit) and the [ Irish Wheelchair
Association (IWA) ](https://www.iwa.ie/services/motoring/disabled-parking-
permits/) .

It costs €35 to apply and you can apply [ online to the IWA
](https://www.iwa.ie/services/motoring/disabled-parking-permits/) or the [
DDAI
](https://www.ddai.ie/eligibilitywizard?utm_campaign=eligibilitywizard&utm_source=howtoapply&utm_medium=bigbutton)
. They will ask you some questions to check if you qualify and then send you
an application form by email or post.

The parking permit is known as the Disabled Person’s Parking Card or Permit
and the EU Parking Card for People with disabilities.  

##  Check if you qualify

You can apply for a card if you are a person with severe restricted mobility
or are certified as blind.

You will need one of the following:

  * Have your medical practitioner or consultant certify that you meet the medical and mobility criteria. 
  * Hold a [ Primary Medical Certificate ](/en/travel-and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-disabled-passengers#l1f4da) . If so, you will automatically qualify, but you still need to apply for the card. 
  * Be certified blind by Vision Ireland (formally National Council for the Blind), a GP, Ophthalmologist or Optician. You will still need to apply for the card. 

You can [ check if you are eligible on the Disabled Drivers Association of
Ireland website
](https://www.ddai.ie/eligibilitywizard?utm_campaign=eligibilitywizard&utm_source=whoqualifies&utm_medium=bigbutton)
or the [ Irish Wheelchair Association website
](https://www.iwa.ie/services/motoring/disabled-parking-permits/) .

###  How to apply for a Primary Medical Certificate

You must apply for the Primary Medical Certificate through your [ Local Health
Office ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/lho/) . A Primary Medical Card
is very useful as you can use it for other related benefits such as to [
exempt yourself from paying VAT, motor tax and Vehicle Registration Tax
](/en/travel-and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-
drivers-and-disabled-passengers/) .

###  How to use the parking card

You can use the card in any vehicle you are travelling in, either as a
passenger or driver. This means you can bring the card with you and display it
in the vehicle that you are driving or travelling in.

You can park in [ assigned disabled person’s parking spaces ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-facilities-for-people-with-
disabilities/) . These spaces have the wheelchair symbol painted on the ground
or have a sign with a symbol displayed.

###  How to display your parking card

You must have a valid card displayed on your vehicle windshield to use a
disabled parking space. The card will show your signature and photograph.

###  Travelling abroad

You can use the card when you travel within the EU. Make sure to bring your
card with you.

Remember that you must follow the motoring laws and restrictions on parking
when travelling abroad. The EU Commission has produced a publication, [
Parking card for people with disabilities in the European Union
](http://www.dttas.ie/roads/publications/english/parking-card-people-people-
disabilities-european-union-conditions-membe-0) .

If you are travelling outside the EU, you should contact the embassy for that
country.

Information on using the parking card abroad is available in the [ Fédération
Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) Guide for the disabled traveller
](http://www.disabledmotorists.eu/) .

###  Parking offences and disabled spaces

It is an [ offence to park a vehicle in a disabled parking space ](/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-fines-and-vehicle-clamping/) unless
you have a valid card. If you illegally park in a disabled parking space, you
will get a parking fine of €150. This increases to €225 if not paid within 28
days.

Since 1 January 2023, the fixed charge amount for misusing a disabled parking
badge is €200. This increases to €300 if you do not pay within 28 days.

Traffic wardens and members of An Garda Síochána have the power to request and
inspect a parking card to ensure it is not being misused.

##  How to apply and renew

Two organisations offer the card in Ireland.

You can [ apply online ](https://myiwa.microsoftcrmportals.com/permit-
home/?utm_source=iwa.ie&utm_medium=on_page&utm_term=11_apply_now&utm_content=scheme_page&utm_campaign=2604_parking_permit_soft_launch)
on the website of the **Irish Wheelchair Association** , or email [
maats@iwa.ie ](mailto:maats@iwa.ie) .

You can [ apply online ](https://www.ddai.ie/parking-permit/how-to-apply) on
the website of the **Disabled Drivers Association** or email [
parkingcard@ddai.ie ](mailto:parkingcard@ddai.ie) .

A parking card costs €35. You can buy a windscreen holder which costs €2.

You will need to get a Garda at a Garda station to identify your photo and
sign part of your application form.

###  Renewing a parking card

The parking card must be renewed every 2 years. You will receive a renewal
form several weeks before your parking card is due to expire. So, if you
change your address, you should tell the organisation that gave you the card.

If you have had any surgery or treatment that may have improved your mobility,
you should include this information in the mobility section of the renewal
form.

###  Replacing a lost parking card

If you lose, misplace or if your card is stolen, apply to the organisation
that gave you the card: The Disabled Drivers Association or the Irish
Wheelchair Association. You will have to pay the standard fee of €35 again.

###  Legislation

The law for the disabled parking card scheme is in [ Section 35 of the Road
Traffic Act 1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/act/pub/0007/sec0035.html#zza7y1994s35)
and [ SI 182/1997 Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1997/en/si/0182.html) .

##  Where to apply

###  Disabled Drivers Association

Parking Card Section  
Ballindine  
Claremorris  
Mayo  
Ireland

**Tel:** (094) 936 4054/4266 or (01) 8103794

**Homepage:** [ http://www.ddai.ie/ ](http://www.ddai.ie/)

**Email:** [ parkingcard@ddai.ie ](mailto:parkingcard@ddai.ie)

###  Irish Wheelchair Association

Áras Cúchulainn  
Blackheath Drive  
Clontarf  
Dublin 3  
D03 AW62

**Tel:** +353 1 818 6400

**Homepage:** [ http://www.iwa.ie ](http://www.iwa.ie)

**Email:** [ info@iwa.ie ](mailto:info@iwa.ie)

_**Page edited:** 11 July 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/disabled-persons-parking-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Disabled%20Person%27s%20Parking%20Card&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/disabled-persons-parking-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/traffic-and-parking/disabled-persons-parking-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Disabled%20Person%27s%20Parking%20Card&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/disabled-persons-parking-
card/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Parking fees, fines and vehicle clamping_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-fines-and-vehicle-clamping/)

A system of parking fees, restrictions and fines is in place throughout towns
and cities in Ireland. Information on fines, parking restrictions and
enforcement of the law by your local authority.

1265.7628

  * [ _Parking facilities for people with disabilities_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/parking-facilities-for-people-with-disabilities/)

This page describes facilities in car parks around Ireland that are designed
for people with disabilities.

1177.0488

  * [ _The European Health Insurance Card_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-abroad/european-health-insurance-card/)

The European Health Insurance Card gives you access to medically necessary,
state-provided healthcare during a temporary stay in another EU/EEA country.
Find out more.

1122.0695

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

