**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Transport and disability ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/transport-and-disability/) > Tax relief for drivers and passengers
with disabilities

#  Tax relief for drivers and passengers with disabilities

  * Introduction 
  * Primary Medical Certificate 
  * The type of vehicle 
  * Residency requirements 
  * Restrictions on disposal of the vehicle 
  * Rates 
  * Fuel grant 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

The [ Disabled Drivers and Disabled Passengers Scheme
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/si/0353.html) provides a range of tax
reliefs linked to the purchase and use of specially constructed or adapted
vehicles by drivers and passengers with a disability.

Under the scheme, you can claim:

  * Remission or repayment of vehicle registration tax (VRT) 
  * Repayment of value-added tax (VAT) on the purchase of a vehicle 
  * Repayment of VAT on the cost of adapting a vehicle 

If you qualify for the scheme, you may get some additional exemptions and
benefits including:

  * An exemption from motor tax on the vehicle, see ‘How to apply’ below. 
  * An exemption from toll road fees, see ‘How to apply’ below. 
  * The fuel grant, see ‘Rates’ below. 

The rules of the scheme are set out in the Disabled Drivers and Disabled
Passengers (Tax Concessions) Regulations 1994 ( [ SI 353/1994
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1994/en/si/0353.html) ) as amended.

##  Primary Medical Certificate

###  How to qualify for the Disabled Drivers and Disabled Passengers Scheme

To qualify for tax relief under the scheme, you must have a valid Primary
Medical Certificate.

A Primary Medical Certificate is a document that you can use to confirm you
are severely and permanently disabled and **one of the following applies** :

  * You are completely or almost completely without the use of both legs. 
  * You are completely without the use of one of your legs and almost completely without the use of the other leg to the extent that you are severely restricted as regards movement in your legs. 
  * You are without both hands or both arms. 
  * You are without one or both legs. 
  * You are completely or almost completely without the use of both hands or arms and completely or almost completely without the use of one leg. 
  * You are a person with restricted growth syndrome (dwarfism) and have serious difficulties with movement of your legs. 

You can apply for a Primary Medical Certificate through your [ Local Health
Office. ](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/lho/)

##  The type of vehicle

If you are a driver or a passenger with a disability you can claim tax relief
on:

  * A new vehicle 
  * A used vehicle that has not been previously registered in the State 

You can also buy a previously registered used vehicle; in which case the
amount of the repayment will be the residual VAT contained in the value of the
vehicle. However, the majority of used vehicles purchased from a dealer are
purchased under the [ Margin Scheme ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/vat-on-
goods/schemes/margin-scheme/index.aspx) . This means that no VAT is due when
the vehicle is bought and therefore no VAT is refundable.

If you bought the vehicle before you qualified as a disabled driver or
disabled passenger, a repayment of VAT and VRT, appropriate to the market
value of the vehicle at the time of entry into the scheme, will be made.

If you are a passenger with disabilities and you buy a used vehicle that has
previously qualified for tax relief under the scheme for transporting disabled
passengers and where the original adaptions remain in place when you buy it,
it is eligible for the scheme.

To qualify for the tax relief the vehicle’s engine must be less than 6,000cc.

##  Residency requirements

A family member of a disabled passenger can also qualify for relief if they
are living with and responsible for the transport of the disabled person in
question and got the vehicle for that purpose.

If you only stay with a family member on a part-time basis, the residency
requirement is not met. However, if you are a minor who is in residential or
medical care on a part-time or occasional basis and spend a significant part
of your time at home, for example, every weekend and holidays, the residency
requirement may be met. The Revenue Commissioners can waive the residency
requirement in certain circumstances. In particular, it will normally be
waived where the applicant acts as a carer and is responsible for the
transport of the family member with the disability.

You should contact the Central Repayments Office to make sure that you meet
the residency requirements for relief under the scheme before buying a
vehicle.

##  Restrictions on disposal of the vehicle

"Disposal" means the sale of the vehicle, the gift of the vehicle to another
person and the hiring or renting of the vehicle. The vehicle must not be
disposed of for at least 2 years from the date the relief is granted. You must
keep the vehicle for 3 years for a specifically adapted vehicle and 6 years
for an extensively adapted vehicle or a wheelchair accessible adapted vehicle.

You will only be allowed to dispose of the vehicle within the retention period
if you refund the Revenue Commissioners a substantial portion of the relief
given. This is calculated by looking at the value of the vehicle at the time
of disposal.

If the vehicle is disposed of following damage in an accident, the damage will
be taken into account in calculating the value of the vehicle at the time of
disposal.

##  Rates

###  Disabled Drivers and Disabled Passengers Scheme

The maximum amount of VRT and VAT relief available under the Disabled Drivers
and Disabled Passengers Scheme depends on whether you are a disabled driver or
passenger and how the car has been adapted.

The maximum amounts are:

  * Disabled drivers: €10,000 
  * Disabled passengers: €16,000 
  * Specifically adapted vehicles for drivers with severe disabilities: €16,000 (Specifically adapted vehicles are vehicles that need significant adaptations) 
  * Extensively adapted vehicles for drivers and passengers: €22,000 (Extensively adapted vehicles are vehicles that need adaptations that cost more than the open market selling price of the vehicle being adapted) 
  * Wheelchair accessible adaptations: €48,000 for a disabled driver and €32,000 for a disabled passenger. This is for people with disabilities who need complex and significant adaptions to their vehicles to allow in-vehicle wheelchair access. It applies to people who have paid VAT, VRT or residual VRT on or after 1 August 2022. 

##  Fuel grant

If you qualify for tax relief under the Disabled Drivers and Disabled
Passengers Scheme, you also qualify for the [ fuel grant
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/online-services/services/claims-and-refunds/apply-
fuel-grant-person-disability.aspx) . The fuel grant is paid per litre, up to a
maximum of 2,730 litres per calendar year.

Since 1 January 2024 the rate per litre is:

  * Petrol – €0.671 
  * Diesel – €0.576 
  * LPG – €0.155 

##  How to apply

###  Applying for an exemption from VRT (or a repayment of VRT and VAT)

You can find further details on this information from [ Revenue’s website
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-allowances/guide-to-
vrt/reliefs-and-exemptions/scheme-for-persons-with-disabilities.aspx) and
their [ guide to the Tax Relief Scheme (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/vrt7.pdf) .

**Applying online**

You can apply for an **exemption from VRT** (or a repayment of VRT and VAT)
online on Revenue’s MyAccount.

You can register for [ MyAccount on revenue.ie ](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-
web/home.html) . If you are applying for the first time, you will need to
submit a primary medical certificate which you can upload on MyAccount.
Revenue’s [ Quick Guide to Making Claims for Relief Online (pdf)
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/online-dd1form-guide.pdf) shows what the application
process looks like.

If your application is accepted for _exemption from VRT_ , your account will
be updated and you will get authorisation to buy a vehicle and an Exemption
Notification that allows the vehicle to be registered as exempt from VRT at
the [ NCTS centre ](https://www.ncts.ie/1095/) . After you buy the vehicle,
you may need to send further documentation.

If your application is accepted for _repayment of VRT and VAT_ , you may need
to send further documentation.

**Applying by post**

If you do not have online access, you can submit a paper form - [ Form DD1
(pdf) ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/form-dd1.pdf) .

If you are applying for the first time, you should also include the original
Primary Medical Certificate. You may also need to submit additional documents
along with your application.

You can post your application freepost to the Central Repayments Office, see
the address below.

Postal applications may experience delays during peak periods, so you are
encouraged to use the online service if possible.

###  Applying for exemption from motor tax

The way you apply for this **motor tax exemption** depends on whether your
vehicle has been registered in Ireland before or not.

**New vehicles exemption from motor tax**

If you have a new vehicle or a vehicle which is being registered in the State
for the first time, you need to complete the RF100 form and give it to your
local Motor Taxation Office. You do not need any documentation from the
Central Repayments Office in Revenue.

New vehicles that are modified may need Individual Vehicle Approval (IVA).
Contact the [ National Standards Authority of Ireland
](https://www.nsai.ie/certification/automotive/national-type-approva/iva/) for
more information.

**Used or second-hand vehicles exemption from motor tax**

If you have a used or second-hand vehicle, you need to apply to Revenue for
the motor tax exemption, see the address below. If the application is
successful you will get a Certificate of Approval.

If your used vehicle was registered outside of Ireland and modified for use
under the scheme, you must have a completed declaration of conversion.

You then need to go to your local Motor Tax Office to tax the vehicle. You
need to bring the following documents with you:

  * Certificate of approval 
  * Change of particulars form RF111 
  * Vehicle Registration Certificate 

The Motor Tax Office will then issue an exempt tax disc, and a replacement
Vehicle Registration Certificate to the registered owner.

###  Applying for the fuel grant

If you qualify for the scheme you are also eligible for a [ fuel grant, which
is paid 12 months in arrears ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/spotlights/drivers-
passengers-with-disabilities-fuel-grant.html) . You should keep your fuel
receipts for 4 years, but do not have to send them when you apply for the fuel
grant. You must estimate the percentage of the fuel that is used for your own
transport or the transport of a disabled passenger.

You can claim your fuel grant by using Revenue's online service [ myAccount
](https://www.ros.ie/myaccount-web/home.html) . To register on myAccount you
need your PPS number, mobile or landline number, email address and home
address. If you do not have internet access you can contact the [ Revenue
Commissioners ](http://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) , Forms &
Leaflets Section at (01) 738 3675 (Monday – Friday) and request a paper form.

The fuel grant is paid directly into your bank account, so you must provide
details of the account you want to be paid into.

###  Applying for a toll road exemption

Vehicles adapted for disabled drivers or passengers are entitled to an
**exemption from toll-fees** .

The [ Disability Toll Exemption Scheme (DTES) ](https://dtes.ie/dtes-scheme/)
allows drivers of qualifying vehicles to travel toll free on all Irish roads
using their DTES disc. Only one application is needed under this scheme.

To qualify, your vehicle must be eligible for tax relief under the Drivers and
Passengers with Disabilities Scheme.

You can apply for a DTES disc and read more information about the rules of the
scheme on [ dtes.ie ](https://dtes.ie/dtes-scheme/) .

If your vehicle is adapted and qualifies for tax relief, but you have not
applied for a DTES disc, you can still travel toll-free by going to the manned
tollbooth and showing your tax disc.

You can find [ further information on the tax relief scheme (pdf)
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/importing-vehicles-duty-free-
allowances/documents/vrt/vrt7.pdf) on revenue.ie.

###  Central Repayments Office

Revenue Commissioners

Sarsfield House  
Francis Street  
Limerick  
V94 R972

**Tel:** 01 738 3671

**Homepage:** [ http://www.revenue.ie ](http://www.revenue.ie)

_**Page edited:** 17 June 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-
disabled-passengers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax%20relief%20for%20drivers%20and%20passengers%20with%20disabilities&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-
disabled-passengers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-
disabled-passengers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Tax%20relief%20for%20drivers%20and%20passengers%20with%20disabilities&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/transport-and-disability/tax-relief-for-disabled-drivers-and-
disabled-passengers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Adapting a home for an older or disabled person_ ](/en/housing/building-or-altering-a-home/adapting-a-home-for-an-older-or-disabled-person/)

Your home may need alterations to suit the changing needs of an older or
disabled person. Information on grants and other supports.

2021.442

  * [ _Tax credits and reliefs for people over 65_ ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

There are some tax reliefs specifically for people aged over 65. This page
also gives an overview of other tax reliefs that may be relevant.

1909.7639

  * [ _Disabled Person's Parking Card_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/traffic-and-parking/disabled-persons-parking-card/)

The European Parking Card scheme makes free parking available for disabled
drivers and passengers in Ireland.

1764.9619

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

