**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Travel and Recreation ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/) > [ Travel to Ireland ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-
ireland/) > Tax-free purchases for non-EU travellers

#  Tax-free purchases for non-EU travellers

  * Introduction 
  * How the Retail Export Scheme works 
  * Conditions for tax relief 
  * Using a VAT-refunding agency 
  * Where to apply 

##  Introduction

Visitors to Ireland from outside the European Union (EU) can buy goods in
Ireland to take home with them and benefit from tax relief. This is called the
Retail Export Scheme. It includes visitors from Great Britain but does not
include people resident in Northern Ireland.

Tax relief is not allowed on services, for example, hotel accommodation,
meals, or car hire. The visitor must provide proof that they are a visitor
from outside the EU when making each purchase. The proof includes evidence of
the place of residence, inbound and outbound flight dates, and a signed
declaration.

##  How the Retail Export Scheme works

The tax relief is provided under the Retail Export Scheme, which operates in 2
ways.

  1. You pay [ Value-Added Tax (VAT ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/duties-and-vat/value-added-tax/) ) when making purchases and get a refund from the relevant retailer or VAT-refunding agency when the retailer or the agency receives proof that the items have been exported. 
  2. In certain retail outlets, the goods are sold tax-free at the point of sale with or without the involvement of a VAT-refunding agency. The goods must be paid for by credit card. If the retailer or the agency does not receive proof that the goods have been exported, they charge the VAT on the goods to your credit card account. 

Before making a purchase, you should confirm with the retailer that they
operate the scheme. You should also clarify whether the retailer is operating
the scheme or with a VAT-refunding agency.

If an agency is being used, you should follow the agency’s specific procedures
when making the purchase. See 'using a VAT refund agency' below.

If the goods are being purchased without an agency, the retailer should issue
you with an export voucher for the purchase. When leaving Ireland, you should
get the voucher certified by Customs at the airport. The certified voucher is
returned to the retailer. If VAT has been paid the retailer refunds the VAT
(less any processing fee).

##  Conditions for tax relief

To qualify for tax relief, the following rules apply:

  * You must be a resident outside of the EU. 
  * The goods must have a total export voucher value of more than €75 including tax. 
  * The goods must be exported out of the EU within 3 months from the end of the month in which they are bought. For example, goods bought during the month of January must be exported by 30 April. 
  * You must supply documentary proof that the goods have been exported. 

###  Documentary proof

Usually, proof of export, called a _certification of export_ , is the export
voucher stamped by Customs at the last point of departure from the EU. For
example, if you buy goods in Ireland and then travel to Germany before you
leave the EU, you must have the relevant documentation stamped by German
Customs authorities. Irish Customs authorities only stamp the documentation if
you have a ticket for a destination outside of the EU, valid not later than
the end of the third month from the date on which the goods were purchased.

If you are unable to have the documentation stamped by the relevant Customs
authorities at the point of departure or have not used the services of a VAT-
refunding agency, you can still have the documentation stamped in your own
country by a person of official status (for example, by Customs or the police)
before returning it to the retailer in Ireland.

There are additional conditions for residents of Great Britain. Proof of
importation into Great Britain and payment of any import duties will be
required in certain circumstances. You can get more details from [ Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/retail-export-scheme/vat-refund-agent.aspx) .

##  Using a VAT-refunding agency

Many retailers operate the refund scheme using VAT-refunding agencies that
arrange for the tourist or visitor to benefit from the tax concession. VAT-
refunding agencies operate independently of the tax authorities:

Agencies use their own systems for operating the scheme, for example:

  * The goods are sold tax-free at the point of sale: You fill out the agency’s tax-free form, have it signed in the shop, attach your purchase receipt to it, and return it to the agency. Your credit card will be charged the value of the tax if the documentation is not handed in at the airport or subsequently returned to the agency. 
  * Tax is paid at the point of sale: You follow the same procedure as above and the tax is refunded to you at the airport when you are leaving. 
  * Tax is paid at the point of sale: You follow the same procedure as above and the tax is refunded by the agency to you, either by post or by credit card transfer. 

Some agencies use a card to record your purchases rather than forms. You swipe
the card each time you make a purchase. You can get more information from the
agency.

Individual tax-free forms for purchases of up to €2,000 (including VAT) may be
lodged directly with the agency refund booths at the airport without a Customs
stamp. Documentation for individual purchases of over €2,000 (including VAT)
must always be presented by you to Customs, with the related export voucher,
so that the voucher can be certified. This is necessary before a VAT refund
can be processed.

You should keep your copy of the documentation received from the retailer for
future reference. If you are mailing the documentation back for a refund, it
is advisable to keep a photocopy.

###  High-value goods

Where an individual item costs €2,000 or more (including VAT), it must be
presented to Customs, along with the appropriate documentation, before any VAT
refund will be approved.

###  If you do not receive your refund

The retailer or agency is obliged to make the refund within 25 working days of
receiving your documentation. If a refund is not received, you should contact
the retailer or agency concerned.

If you are having difficulty getting your refund, you can contact the Revenue
Commissioners (see ‘Where to apply’ below).

###  Fees

VAT-refunding agencies usually charge an administration fee. All retailers and
VAT-refunding agencies are obliged to indicate the level of this fee.
Similarly, agencies making refunds in foreign currency are obliged to indicate
the exchange rate used.

##  Where to apply

You should contact the retailer or refund agent about claims for refunds of
VAT. It should be noted that the Revenue Commissioners do not administer the
Retail Export Scheme or make refunds directly to tourists under the scheme.

Retailers or refund agents can direct any enquiries to their Revenue office.

More [ information on the Retail Export Scheme
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/vat/retail-export-scheme/index.aspx) is available
on Revenue's website.

###  Revenue Commissioners

Indirect Taxes Division

VAT Interpretation Branch  
Stamping Building  
Dublin Castle  
Dublin 2  
Ireland

**Homepage:** [ http://www.revenue.ie ](http://www.revenue.ie)

**Email:** [ vat@revenue.ie ](mailto:vat@revenue.ie)

_**Page edited:** 9 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-
and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/tax-free-purchases-for-non-eu-
travellers/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Tax-free%20purchases%20for%20non-
EU%20travellers&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/travel-to-ireland/tax-free-purchases-for-non-eu-
travellers/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/travel-to-ireland/tax-free-purchases-for-non-eu-
travellers/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Tax-
free%20purchases%20for%20non-
EU%20travellers&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/travel-to-ireland/tax-free-purchases-for-non-eu-
travellers/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Related documents

  * [ _Customs regulations for travellers to Ireland_ ](/en/travel-and-recreation/travel-to-ireland/customs-regulations-for-travellers/)

Find out about the important rules in place regarding customs regulations for
people travelling to Ireland.

1519.9956

  * [ _Coming from the EU/EEA to work_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-from-eu-to-work/)

Details the rights of EU/EEA nationals to come to Ireland to work, and covers
rights while working.

1487.6937

  * [ _Coming to Ireland - tax and social insurance_ ](/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/coming-to-ie-tax/)

Important information for those coming to work in Ireland about tax issues of
residence, domicile, double taxation, income earned prior to moving, and
temporary employment in Ireland.

1426.3295

###  Contact Us

If you have a question about this topic you can contact the Citizens
Information Phone Service on [ _0818 07 4000_ ](tel:0818074000) (Monday to
Friday, 9am to 8pm).

You can also contact your local [ _Citizens Information Centre_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

