**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ What's New ](/en/whats-new/) > New on
Citizens Information 28-08-2023

#  New on Citizens Information 28-08-2023

28 August 2023

#####  Site updates

If you sat the [ Leaving Certificate
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-
certificate/) in 2023, you can now review and download your results online. If
you have questions about accessing the Leaving Certificate results portal you
can phone or email staff at the State Examinations Commission until 4
September 2023.

You can speak to a guidance counsellor on the National Parents Council Leaving
Certificate helpline until 2 September 2023. Find contact details and opening
times on our page about the [ Leaving Certificate
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-
certificate/) .

You must apply to review your Leaving Certificate scripts before you can view
them. Find out how and when to apply, view your exam scripts and [ appeal your
Leaving Certificate results
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/appeal-
leaving-cert/#0910f1) .

Round One of CAO offers will be made from 2pm on Wednesday, 30 August 2023 and
will close on 5 September 2023. Further CAO offers will continue until the end
of October 2023. You can read more about [ college applications and entry
requirements ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
.

The [ Social Welfare Appeals Office
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/) has released a [ new form (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/266425/135d508b-4c91-48ec-9852-36c5d024560f.pdf#page=null)
for appealing social welfare decisions.

[ From 1 September 2023
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/domestic-refuse/) , there will be a waste recovery levy of €10 per
tonne (or 1,000kg). The existing “landfill levy” will also increase by €10 to
€85 per tonne.

The HPV vaccine catch-up program will extend from 29 August 2023. Until 31
December 2023, you will be able to [ register for the HPV vaccine
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/children-s-
health/vaccinations-for-children/) if you are male and aged under 22. If you
are female, aged under 25 and were eligible to get the free HPV vaccine in
secondary school but you did not get it, you can book an appointment now.

**New and recently edited**

These pages have been reviewed and improved:

  * [ Returning to Ireland with children ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-with-children/)
  * [ Active retirement groups ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/retirement/retirement-from-work/active-retirement/)
  * [ Retirement age ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/retirement/older-people-and-working/retirement-age/)
  * [ Workplace mediation ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/enforcement-and-redress/workplace-mediation/)
  * [ Enduring power of Attorney ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/before-a-death/power-of-attorney/)
  * [ Criminal legal aid ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal-aid-and-advice/criminal-legal-aid/)
  * [ Legal representation in criminal cases ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/legal-representation-in-criminal-cases/)
  * [ Landfill sites ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/landfill-sites/)
  * [ Leaving Certificate Applied ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-examinations/leaving-certificate-applied/)

###  Follow Us

  * [ Facebook ](https://www.facebook.com/citizensinformation)
  * [ Twitter ](https://twitter.com/citizensinfo)
  * [ LinkedIn ](https://www.linkedin.com/company/citizens-information-board/)
  * [ Instagram ](https://www.instagram.com/citizensinformation/)

###  Filter by tag

  * [ News ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_tags=news)

  * [ Videos ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_tags=videos)

  * [ Site updates ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_tags=site-updates)

  * [ Did you know? ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_tags=did-you-know)

###  Years

  * [ 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_year=2024)
  * [ 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_year=2023)

###  Archives

  * [ September 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-09)
  * [ August 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-08)
  * [ July 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-07)
  * [ June 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-06)
  * [ May 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-05)
  * [ April 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-04)
  * [ March 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-03)
  * [ February 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-02)
  * [ January 2024 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2024-01)
  * [ December 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2023-12)
  * [ November 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2023-11)
  * [ October 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2023-10)
  * [ September 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2023-09)
  * [ August 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2023-08)
  * [ July 2023 ](/en/whats-new/?whatsnew_date=2023-07)

