English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > Faoi

#  Faoi

  * [ Maidir le Faisnéis do Shaoránaigh ](/ga/about/about-citizens-information/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland.

  * [ Ráiteas Inrochtaineachta agus Inúsáidteachta ](/ga/about/accessibility/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland. Citizensinformation.ie provides you with the
information you need at various stages in your life.

  * [ Téigh i dteagmháil linn ](/ga/about/contact-us/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by the
Citizens Information Board. The site provides information on the social and
civil rights of everyone in Ireland. Citizensinformation.ie gives you the
information you need at various stages in your life.

  * [ Fógra fianán ](/ga/about/cookies/)

The Cookie notice gives information about cookies used on
citizensinformation.ie and how you can manage your cookie preferences.

  * [ Séanadh ](/ga/about/disclaimer/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland.

  * [ Send feedback about citizensinformation.ie ](/ga/about/feedback/)

Send us feedback about citizensinformation.ie. We do not provide information
or advice via email at present.

  * [ Ráiteas príobháideachais ](/ga/about/privacy/)

This page describes how we process any data we collect from you through the
citizensinformation.ie website.

  * [ Faisnéis Earnála Poiblí a Athúsáid ](/ga/about/reuse-psi/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland. Citizensinformation.ie provides you with the
information you need at various stages in your life. Our Local Directory
allows you to find public services in your locality and you can submit a
question on line about your rights and entitlements in Ireland.

  * [ Déan obair dheonach le Faisnéis do Shaoránaigh ](/ga/about/volunteer-with-citizens-information/)

Faigh amach faoi obair dheonach leis an tSeirbhís um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh.

  * [ CIS complaints policy ](/ga/about/cis-complaints-policy/)

The Citizens Information Service is committed to dealing effectively with any
complaints you may have about our service. We also aim to learn from our
mistakes and use the information we gain to improve our services.

  * [ About Citizens Information ](/ga/about/temp/)

Citizensinformation.ie is an Irish eGovernment website developed by Citizens
Information Board. The site provides information on the social and civil
rights of everyone in Ireland.

  * [ Guide to accessibility tools ](/ga/about/guide-to-accessibility-tools/)

Information about how to navigate citizensinformation.ie using accessibility
tools and features by operating system.

###  Ábhar is mó éilimh i "Faoi"

  1. [ Faisnéis Earnála Poiblí a Athúsáid ](/ga/about/reuse-psi/)
  2. [ Ráiteas Inrochtaineachta agus Inúsáidteachta ](/ga/about/accessibility/)
  3. [ Maidir le Faisnéis do Shaoránaigh ](/ga/about/about-citizens-information/)
  4. [ Déan obair dheonach le Faisnéis do Shaoránaigh ](/ga/about/volunteer-with-citizens-information/)
  5. [ Téigh i dteagmháil linn ](/ga/about/contact-us/)

