English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Faoi ](/ga/about/) > About Citizens
Information

#  About Citizens Information

  * About us 
  * Other routes to information 
  * Contact us 

##  About us

The [ citizensinformation.ie ](/ga/) website provides comprehensive
information on public services and on the entitlements of citizens in Ireland.
We gather information from various government departments and agencies, and
make sure that you have all the information you need, presented in an easy-to-
understand way.

The site has been specially designed around the needs of users for those times
in life when you need information about your rights and how to apply for State
services in Ireland.

Citizensinformation.ie was developed, and is maintained by the Citizens
Information Board. Citizensinformation.ie website is an Irish eGovernment
initiative, and was originally established under the Government's first action
plan for the Information Society.

The [ Citizens Information Board ](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/)
is the statutory body which supports the provision of information, advice and
advocacy on a broad range of public and social services. It provides the
Citizens Information website, citizensinformation.ie, and supports the network
of Citizens Information Centres and the Citizens Information Phone Service
0818 07 4000 to provide free, confidential, independent and impartial
information to all.

The Citizens Information Board produces [ a number of publications
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/en/publications/information/) about
your rights and entitlements.

It also funds and supports the [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS)
](http://www.mabs.ie) 0818 07 2000 and the [ National Advocacy Service for
People with Disabilities ](https://advocacy.ie/) .

##  Other routes to information

Citizens Information is available

  * By phone through the Citizens Information Phone Service: 0818 07 4000, Monday to Friday, 9am-8pm 
  * In person by calling to a [ Citizens Information Centre near you ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie)

**A note on 0818 telephone numbers**

Calls to [ 0818 non-geographic telephone numbers (NGNs)
](https://www.comreg.ie/industry/licensing/numbering/ngn-review/) cost no more
than calling a landline number and will be included in your bundle of call
minutes if your bundle includes landline calls.

##  Contact us

You can [ send us feedback ](/ga/about/feedback/) about citizensinformation.ie
by email.

You can contact Citizens Information by post:

Citizens Information Board  
Ground Floor  
George's Quay House  
43 Townsend St.  
Dublin 2  
D02 VK65

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 14 Bealtaine 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/temp/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook)
[
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=About%20Citizens%20Information&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/temp/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter)
[
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/temp/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp)
[
](mailto:?subject=About%20Citizens%20Information&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/temp/?utm_source=sharebutton_email)
[ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

