English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Faoi ](/ga/about/) > CIS complaints
policy

#  CIS complaints policy

  * Introduction 
  * Informal Resolution 
  * Formal Complaint 

##  Introduction

The Citizens Information Service works hard to make sure that the service we
provide is up to date, relevant and of the highest standard. However, there
may be times when you are unhappy with the service. The Citizens Information
Service is committed to dealing effectively with any complaints you may have
about our service. We also aim to learn from our mistakes and use the
information we gain to improve our services.

While your complaint will be dealt with in confidence, be aware that it will
be discussed with those staff necessary to investigate the complaint. If you
wish to see a specific outcome to your complaint, please tell us what this is.
We cannot guarantee that this outcome will be achieved but it does help us to
understand what the expectation is.

We will make sure that your interactions with us in the future do not suffer
just because you have made a complaint.

If you wish to make a complaint this is how you do it.

##  Informal Resolution

If you are dissatisfied or wish to complain, raise it with the person you are
dealing with. If possible, they will try to resolve it there and then.
However, they may need time to look into it. If this is the case they will
respond to your complaint with an outcome within 5 working days. If they can’t
help they will explain why and, if you wish, you can follow the formal
complaints process below.

##  Formal Complaint

You can make the formal complaint in person, by phone, in writing or by
completing a Customer Complaint form available at reception. Remember to
include key information when making your formal complaint such as name,
address, telephone number, email address (if you have one), details of
complaint including date/time service used.

Formal complaints must be made within 14 days of using the service. You will
receive an acknowledgement of your complaint within five working days and a
response with an outcome to your complaint within 20 working days of receiving
the complaint.

If you are not satisfied with the response to your complaint, you can ask for
it to be reviewed within 5 working days. You can also go on to submit an
appeal within 5 working days of receiving the outcome of the review.

_Please note that any personal data pertaining to you will be processed in
line with the_ [ _Data Protection Notice for Citizens Information Services_
](https://www.citizensinformationboard.ie/downloads/data_protection/CIS_Data_Protection_Notice_v14apr2020.pdf)
_which can be seen by scanning the QR code:_

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 10 Aibreán 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=CIS%20complaints%20policy&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=CIS%20complaints%20policy&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/about/cis-
complaints-policy/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Ionaid Eolais don Óige_ ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/youth-information-centres/)

Cuireann Ionaid Eolais don Óige eolas saor in aisce, faoi rún ar fáil do
dhaoine óga agus do dhaoine atá ag obair leis an óige.

  * [ _Iarratas a dhéanamh ar íocaíochtaí agus seirbhísí leasa shóisialaigh ar line_ ](/ga/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/iarratas-a-dheanamh-ar-iocaiochtai-agus-seirbhisi-leasa-shoisialaigh-ar-line/)

Ligeann suíomh Gréasáin MyWelfare duit iarratas a dhéanamh ar líne ar
íocaíochtaí leasa shóisialaigh agus ar sheirbhísí eile. Teastaíonn cuntas
MyGovID uait chun rochtain a fháil ar sheirbhísí leasa ar líne.

  * [ _Truailliú torainn agus gearáin torainn_ ](/ga/environment/pollution/rialachain-torainn/)

Na rialacha maidir le torann a rialú, na comhlachtaí éagsúla atá freagrach
agus conas gearán a dhéanamh faoi thorann iomarcach

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

