English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Teaghlach agus Caidrimh ](/ga/birth-
family-relationships/) > [ Scaradh, colscaradh agus díscaoileadh ](/ga/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/) > How pensions are assessed
during a separation, divorce and dissolution

#  How pensions are assessed during a separation, divorce and dissolution

  * Introduction 
  * Pension adjustment order 
  * If you lived together but were notmarried or in a civil partnership 
  * Factors the court will consider 
  * How do I get information on pension benefits? 
  * After the order is granted 
  * How to apply for a pension adjustment order 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

When you end your marriage (or civil partnership) by judicial separation,
divorce or dissolution or certain cohabitations, the court can decide to
divide your assets with your former partner (for their benefit or for the
benefit of any dependent children). This is to make sure that each person is
provided for.

If you or your spouse, civil partner, qualified cohabitant have been in a
pension arrangement for some time, pensions could be a very significant part
of your family assets. While the [ family home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/separation-
and-divorce/family-and-shared-home/) is usually the most valuable asset, your
pension can also be considered an asset. This means the court can order that
your pension be divided into whatever shares it considers appropriate. This
decision and instruction from the court is called a _pension adjustment order_
.

Pension rights cannot be shared out without a court order – a [ separation
agreement ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-
agreement/) cannot share out pension rights. A judicial separation, divorce or
dissolution or an application for redress following the ending of a
cohabitation is necessary to get a pension adjustment order.

A pension adjustment order will not be made if the applying former spouse or
civil partner has married or remarried.

The law on pension adjustment orders is set out in the:

  * [ Family Law Act 1995 ](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1995_0026.htm)
  * [ Family Law (Divorce) Act 1996 ](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/EN_ACT_1996_0033.htm)
  * [ Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010 ](http://www.lawreform.ie/_fileupload/RevisedActs/WithAnnotations/HTML/en_act_2010_0024.htm)

##  Pension adjustment order

A _pension adjustment order_ is when the court orders your pension be shared
with your former spouse or civil partner or qualified cohabitant.

For example, if one person has a substantial pension, and the other person who
worked in the home has no pension, the court can order that part of the
pension be paid to the other person (or for the benefit of a dependent child).

The pension adjustment order directs the pension scheme trustees or
administrator to pay a portion of pension benefits to the non-member spouse or
to another person for the benefit of a dependant. The Court decides the level
of benefit to be made to the non-member spouse and this is worked out by
calculating a ‘relevant period’ and the ‘relevant percentage’.

  * Relevant period - this is the period during which the benefits were earned, that is the start date to end date (it cannot extend beyond the date of the decree of divorce or separation). 
  * Relevant percentage - this is the percentage of the benefit to be taken into account that is earned during the relevant period. The court can also order that part of the pension fund is split and placed into another pension fund in the name of the other spouse or civil partner so that the non-member has benefits that are completely separate. 

If there are multiple private pension arrangements, the court will make
separate pension adjustment orders, as required.

###  **Types of pension adjustment orders**

A pension scheme can cover different types of benefits. For the purposes of
pension adjustment orders, these benefits are broken into:

  * Contingent benefits - death in service benefits under a pension scheme 
  * Retirement benefits - all other benefits payable under a pension scheme 

A pension scheme member may be eligible for one or both types of benefits.
Each type of benefit must be applied for separately under different pension
adjustment orders.

A pension adjustment order on contingent benefits can only be made up to a
year after a divorce or legal separation has been granted and the pension
adjustment order ends if the member spouse leaves the relevant employment. A
pension adjustment order on retirement benefits can be made at any time.

##  If you lived together but were notmarried or in a civil partnership

Pension adjustment orders can also apply to cohabitants, but the rules are
slightly different.

A court can make a pension adjustment order if a _cohabitation_ ends (this
means a cohabiting couple are no longer in a relationship). However, unlike in
the case of separation, divorce or dissolution, the pension adjustment order
can only be made in respect of [ a qualified cohabitant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/problems-
in-marriages-and-other-relationships/redress-scheme-for-cohabiting-
couples/#28565c) , not any dependent children. In addition, the rules of the
pension scheme must expressly allow for a non-member qualified cohabitant to
apply for a pension adjustment order in respect of a contingent benefit.

A _cohabiting couple_ is a couple that lives together in an intimate and
committed relationship, who are not married to each other and not in a civil
partnership. [ Cohabiting couples have certain rights ](/ga/birth-family-
relationships/cohabiting-couples/rights-of-cohabiting-couples/) in relation to
property, custody of children, maintenance and inheritance. To qualify for
these rights, you must have been cohabiting **for at least 5 years** (or **2
years** if you have dependent children together).

Cohabiting couples can be opposite-sex or same-sex. A cohabiting relationship
can continue to be ‘intimate’ even if it is not sexual.

##  Factors the court will consider

Before a court grants a judicial separation, divorce, dissolution, each spouse
(or civil partner) should have fully revealed all of the financial resources
to the other person. This includes full details of any pension.

The court will consider all of the financial resources available to each
person before it makes a pension adjustment order.

Even if the court does not make a pension adjustment order, it may take the
value of the pension into account when making other financial orders.

##  How do I get information on pension benefits?

If legal proceedings have started, each spouse, civil partner, qualified
cohabitant must give the details of their property and income to the other
spouse, civil partner, qualified cohabitant (or to a person representing any
dependent children). Property and income include rights acquired under a
pension scheme.

With the agreement of the member spouse, civil partner, or qualified
cohabitant, the trustees should, if possible, provide the information
voluntarily to avoid the expense of obtaining a court order. If this is not
possible, the court may direct pension scheme trustees to provide more
specific information in relation to pension benefits. The trustees must
provide the information within the period specified by the court.

This is set out in the [ Pensions Act 1990
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1990/en/act/pub/0025/index.html) .

##  After the order is granted

When a pension adjustment order is granted by a court, it is served on the
trustees of the spouse's pension scheme. The trustees will then make the
necessary adjustments to the provisions of the scheme.

Pension schemes are administered by trustees who must follow the terms set out
in the trust deed and rules without a court order. The trustees cannot change
the terms of the trust and make provision for a person who is outside the
scope of the scheme, even if the member requests them to do so.

For example, the terms of a trust could make provision for a member's spouse
(such as a survivor's pension), and this will be payable to the member's
lawful spouse, even though the member may have been separated for many years
and have a new partner.

The terms in a separation agreement in relation to pensions may not be
enforceable against the trustees or legally binding.

Pensions are particularly complex, so you should seek specialist advice in
relation to the value of a pension. Find [ more information on pensions
](/ga/money-and-tax/personal-finance/pensions/introduction-to-pensions/) .

##  How to apply for a pension adjustment order

The court can make a pension adjustment order when it is granting a decree of
judicial separation, divorce or dissolution.

Alternatively, either spouse can apply to the court for a pension adjustment
order **after** the decree of judicial separation, divorce or dissolution has
been granted.

##  Further information

The Pensions Authority is responsible for regulating pension schemes. You can
visit their website for information on [ how pensions may be affected by
separation or divorce
](http://www.pensionsauthority.ie/en/LifeCycle/Pensions_on_separation_and_divorce/)
. The Pensions Authority has also published [ A brief guide to the pension
provisions of the Family Law Acts (pdf) ](https://pensionsauthority.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2023/09/a_brief_guide_to_the_pension_provisions_of_the_family_law_acts1.pdf)
and the [ Pensions on separation and divorce checklist (pdf)
](https://pensionsauthority.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/pensions_on_separation_and_divorce_checklist1.pdf) .

###  An tÚdarás Pinsean

Teach Verschoyle  
28/30 Sráid an Mhóta Íocht  
Baile Átha Cliath 2  
Éire

**Teil:** (01) 613 1900

**Láithreán Gréasáin:** [ https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/
](https://www.pensionsauthority.ie/)

**R-phost:** [ info@pensionsauthority.ie ](mailto:info@pensionsauthority.ie)

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 17 Meán Fómhair 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=How%20pensions%20are%20assessed%20during%20a%20separation%2C%20divorce%20and%20%20dissolution&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/birth-family-
relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=How%20pensions%20are%20assessed%20during%20a%20separation%2C%20divorce%20and%20%20dissolution&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/birth-
family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-
pensions/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Gnéithe a thugann an cúirt san áireamh i gcásanna scaradh/ colscaradh/díscaoilte._ ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/factors-in-separation-divorce/)

Na fachtóirí a thógann an cúirt san áireamh i gcás iarratas ar scaradh,
colscaradh nó díscaoilte.

  * [ _Cearta comharbais tar éis idirscartham colscartha nó scaoilte_ ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/succession/)

Baineann do chearta comharbais le d'oidhreacht, agus is féidir leis na cearta
seo athrú tar éis idirscartha nó colscartha.

  * [ _Cánacha Caipitiúla tar éis scartha/colscartha_ ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-divorce/)

Cur síos gairid ar an tionchar a bhíonn ag scaradh/colscaradh ar chánacha
Caipitiúla - cáin ar ghnóthacháin caipitiúla, cáin ar fháltais caipitiúla agus
stampdhleacht.

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

