English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Comhshaol ](/ga/environment/) > [
Deontais agus scéimeanna comhshaoil ​​do do theach
](/ga/environment/environmental-grants-and-schemes-for-your-home/) > Micrea-
ghiniúint

#  Micrea-ghiniúint

  * Cad is micrea-ghiniúint ann? 
  * What is the Micro-generation Support Scheme (MSS)? 
  * Cé mhéad is féidir a fháil do mo leictreachas? 
  * An gcáilím don Scéim Tacaíochta Micrea-ghiniúna? 
  * More information on micro-generation 

##  Cad is micrea-ghiniúint ann?

Micro-generation is the small-scale generation of electricity from renewable
sources by households and small businesses.

You can do this by installing a small generator powered by a renewable source.
Some examples of sources of micro-generation include:

  * Painéil ghréine 
  * Micrea-gaoithe 
  * Micrea-hidrea 
  * Teas agus cumhacht in-athnuaite micrea-inathnuaite (CHP) 

This electricity you generate from these renewable sources can be stored in a
battery and used, or it can be sold to the grid through your electricity
provider.

##  What is the Micro-generation Support Scheme (MSS)?

The Micro-generation Support Scheme allows homes, businesses, farms and
community buildings to sell any excess electricity they produce from solar
panels back to the grid.

If you sell excess renewable energy to the grid, you get a payment known as a
Clean Export Guarantee (CEG).

The amount you get paid depends on your energy provider.

###  Deontais le haghaidh painéil gréine

If you own your own home you can apply to the SEAI for a [ grant towards the
cost of installing solar panels ](/ga/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-solar-panels/)
.

The SEAI is considering extending their grant support to include other forms
of renewable energy, such as:

  * Micrea-gaoithe 
  * Micrea-hidrea 
  * CHP micrea-inathnuaite 

Léigh tuilleadh faoi [ dheontais do phainéil ghréine i do theach
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-solar-panels/)
agus is féidir leat faisnéis a fháil faoi [ dheontais do phainéil ghréine i do
ghnó ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-
employment/self-employment/supports-for-businesses-going-green/) .

###  How does the Micro-generation Support Scheme work?

If you don’t have solar panels already, you can [ apply for a solar PV grant
](/ga/housing/housing-grants-and-schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-
improvements/grants-for-solar-panels/) to help with the cost of getting them.

You must tell ESB Networks that you plan to install solar panels. You can do
this by completing a [ NC6 form (pdf)
](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-source/publications/6-e02835310-esb-
nc-form_dec_22_nc6_final-v.pdf?sfvrsn=e5b30164_11) or a [ NC7 form (pdf)
](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-source/publications/esbn_form-
nc7_dec21.pdf?sfvrsn=3e05b9bc_19) , depending on the size of your
microgeneration system. You can fill the form in yourself or with the help of
the person who installed your system.

You should use the [ NC6 form (pdf) ](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-
source/publications/6-e02835310-esb-nc-
form_dec_22_nc6_final-v.pdf?sfvrsn=e5b30164_11) if your microgeneration system
is:

  * Single phase electricity and less than 6kW 
  * 3 phase electricity and less than 11kW 

You should use the [ NC7 form (pdf) ](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/docs/default-
source/publications/esbn_form-nc7_dec21.pdf?sfvrsn=3e05b9bc_19) if your
microgeneration system is:

  * Single phase electricity and between 6kW to 50kW 
  * 3 phase electricity and between 11kW to 50kW 

When ESB Networks has processed your form, they will let your energy supplier
know that you have installed a microgeneration system. If you have a smart
meter installed, your energy supplier will know already.

When your solar panels are installed and connected, they will generate
electricity. This will lower the cost of your electricity bills.

When your solar panels produce more electricity than you use, you can sell the
excess back to the grid through your electricity supplier.

**How is my electricity measured?**

If you have a smart meter, this will measure the exact amount of electricity
you use and sell. This is automatically recorded every half an hour by your
smart meter.

If you don’t have a smart meter, but you qualify for one, you will not be paid
for the electricity you sell until your smart meter has been installed.
Payments will begin once your smart meter is installed and your NC6 or NC7
form has been processed.

If you don’t have a smart meter and don’t yet qualify for one, you will be
paid based on a deemed volume assumption. This is calculated by ESB Networks
using a formula set by the Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU).

##  Cé mhéad is féidir a fháil do mo leictreachas?

The amount of money you will get for your excess electricity depends on:

  * Cé mhéad leictreachais a ghineann tú 
  * An ráta atá socraithe ag do sholáthraí leictreachais 

The amount of electricity that you sell to the grid will generally be shown on
your electricity bill. However, some suppliers will send you a separate
statement with the information.

###  **Díolúintí cánach do mhicrea-ghiniúin**

From 1 January 2024 until 31 December 2025 if you sell your electricity back
to the national grid, you qualify for a tax exemption of €400 per year on the
income you generate from selling your excess electricity.

##  An gcáilím don Scéim Tacaíochta Micrea-ghiniúna?

The scheme is available for homes and non-domestic sites, such as farms,
businesses and  
community buildings.

To qualify, your home must:

  * Have solar panels 
  * A bheith tógtha roimh 2021 
  * Have a Meter Point Registration Number (MPRN) from the Meter Registration System Operator (MRSO) 
  * A bheith cláraithe le soláthraí leictreachais 

Your home does not need to meet any minimum [ Building Energy Rating (BER)
](https://www.seai.ie/home-energy/building-energy-rating-ber/) to qualify.

Gov.ie have [ more information on qualifying criteria for non domestic sites
(pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/244404/1477c2aa-9fbc-4c30-b4f7-454136806d33.pdf#page=null)
.

##  More information on micro-generation

The Commission of Regulation of Utilities (CRU) has a useful [ questions and
answers document on microgeneration (pdf) ](https://cruie-
live-96ca64acab2247eca8a850a7e54b-5b34f62.divio-
media.com/documents/CRU202366_CRU_Microgeneration_QAs__-_V1.0_Updated.pdf) .

Tá [ faisnéis ag an SEAI faoi conas iarratas a dhéanamh ar an deontas
Leictreachais Gréine ](https://www.seai.ie/grants/home-energy-grants/solar-
electricity-grant/) .

Má tá ceisteanna agat ar mhicrea-ghineadóirí, tá [ leathanach Ceisteanna
Coitianta ag ESB Network ](https://www.esbnetworks.ie/help-centre/generator-
connections/connect-a-micro-generator) .

Is féidir leat féachaint ar [ Dhearadh Scéim Deiridh na Scéime Micrea-ghiniúna
(PDF)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/244404/1477c2aa-9fbc-4c30-b4f7-454136806d33.pdf#page=null)
ar gov.ie.

Léigh tuilleadh faoi [ dheontais le haghaidh painéil ghréine i do theach
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/grants-for-home-renovations-and-improvements/grants-for-solar-panels/)
agus [ tithe níos glaise ](/ga/environment/environmental-grants-and-schemes-
for-your-home/greener-homes/) . Is féidir leat faisnéis a fháil faoi [
thacaíochtaí do ghnólachtaí glasa
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/types-of-employment/self-
employment/supports-for-businesses-going-green/) .

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 27 Bealtaine 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/environment/environmental-
grants-and-schemes-for-your-home/micrea-
ghiniuint/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Micrea-
ghini%C3%BAint&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/environment/environmental-
grants-and-schemes-for-your-home/micrea-
ghiniuint/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/environment/environmental-
grants-and-schemes-for-your-home/micrea-
ghiniuint/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [ ](mailto:?subject=Micrea-
ghini%C3%BAint&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/environment/environmental-
grants-and-schemes-for-your-home/micrea-
ghiniuint/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

