English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Oideachas agus Oiliúint
](/ga/education/) > [ Oideachas bunscoile agus iar-bhunscoile
](/ga/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/) > [ Tacaíocht Oideachais
](/ga/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/) >
Visiting Teacher Service

#  Visiting Teacher Service

  * What is the Visiting Teacher Service? 
  * Visiting teachers for blind and visually impaired children 
  * Visiting teachers for deaf children 
  * Assistive technology and mobility 
  * Free Visiting Teacher Service 
  * How to get a visit from the Visiting Teacher Service? 

##  What is the Visiting Teacher Service?

The [ Visiting Teacher Service (VTS) ](https://ncse.ie/visiting-teachers) is
provided by specially trained teachers to children who are:

  * Blind or visually impaired, or 
  * Deaf or hard of hearing 

The VTS also offers support to parents or guardians and schools.

The VTS support can begin shortly following the birth of the child and
continue through primary and post-primary education where appropriate.

The VTS can provide information on available education options and assist
parents in choosing a [ pre-school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/pre-school-education-and-
childcare/early-childhood-education/) , [ primary school
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/going-to-primary-school/choosing-a-primary-school/) or [ post-
primary school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-
post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-
school/) for their child.

The Visiting Teacher Service is free of charge.

##  Visiting teachers for blind and visually impaired children

Visiting teachers work with blind and visually impaired children and provide
guidance and support to their parents or guardians. They can assess the
effects of visual impairment and can advise on each child’s needs now and in
the future.

To support students with visual impairments in mainstream schools (including
pre-schools), visiting teachers can advise schools about:

  * Educational planning 
  * Suitable teaching methods 
  * Classroom management strategies 
  * Recommended assistive technologies 
  * Making the environment safer for visually impaired children 

Visiting teachers conduct assessments, give advice on equipment commonly used
by people who are visually impaired, and advise on additional personnel
resources, when needed.

##  Visiting teachers for deaf children

Visiting teachers work with deaf or hard-of-hearing children and provide
guidance and support to their parents or guardians. They monitor the child’s
language development and communication skills, encouraging development of
these through everyday activities, interaction and play.

To support deaf or hard-of-hearing children in mainstream schools (including
pre-schools), visiting teachers can advise schools about:

  * Educational planning 
  * Suitable teaching methods 
  * Classroom management strategies 
  * Recommended assistive technologies 
  * The acoustic environment of the classroom to help hard-of-hearing children 

Applications for [ home tuition in sign language
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/irish-sign-language-isl-tuition-scheme/)
should be made to the visiting teacher. You can find [ contact details for
visiting teachers ](https://ncse.ie/contact-a-visiting-teacher) on the
National Council for Special Education website.

##  Assistive technology and mobility

Visiting teachers can refer children for assessment for low-vision aids and
teach the child how to use them. Visiting teachers help children develop
tactile and other sensory skills and give advice on self-help skills and other
skills needed for independent living.

Visiting teachers can also:

  * Provide support in developing pre-Braille skills 
  * Give some instruction in mobility, or refer the child for more mobility instruction, if appropriate 

Visiting teachers evaluate the acoustic environment for deaf or hard-of-
hearing children and help them manage audiology equipment.

They also make recommendations and support schools in applying for [
reasonable accommodations
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/state-
examinations/examination-arrangements-for-students-with-disabilities/)
provided by the State Examinations Commission.

##  Free Visiting Teacher Service

The service is free.

There is no fee for the Visiting Teacher Service. It is open to all children
living in Ireland who need the service.

##  How to get a visit from the Visiting Teacher Service?

Before a child is assessed for the Visiting Teacher Service, you must complete
a [ referral form for the Visiting Teacher Service (MS Word)
](https://ncse.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Referral-Form_Visiting-
Teacher_NCSE_14.04.22.doc) .

You must provide an up-to-date audiology or ophthalmology report, with your
form.

You should send the referral application directly to the [ local Visiting
Teacher ](https://ncse.ie/vt_contact_details) .

Referrals to the VTS can be made by:

  * Parents or guardians 
  * Schools 
  * [ Health Service Executive (HSE) ](/ga/health/health-system/health-service-executive/)
  * Eye clinics 
  * [ Vision Ireland ](http://www.ncbi.ie/)
  * [ Chime ](https://www.chime.ie/)
  * The [ National Hearing Implant & Viani Research Centre ](http://www.nhivrc.ie/index.html)

Any health professional who wishes to refer a child should first discuss their
concerns fully with the child's parents or guardians.

The VTS will assess your child to find out if the service is suitable for your
child. No child is too young to get a visit from the visiting teacher service

**The Visiting Teacher Service will also accept referrals where a child's
visual impairment or deafness is not their main disability, but makes their
overall situation more challenging.**

You can find out more the Visiting Teacher Service on the [ National Council
for Special Education (NCSE) website ](https://ncse.ie/visiting-teachers) .

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 11 Meán Fómhair 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/visiting-teacher-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Visiting%20Teacher%20Service&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/visiting-teacher-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/visiting-teacher-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Visiting%20Teacher%20Service&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/education/primary-
and-post-primary-education/educational-supports/visiting-teacher-
service/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Seirbhísí meabhairshláinte do leanaí agus do dhaoine óga in Éirinn_ ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/services-and-supports-for-children/mental-health-services-children-young-people/)

Faigh amach cad iad na seirbhísí atá ar fáil agus conas teacht orthu.

  * [ _Seirbhísí Sláinte Leanaí_ ](/ga/health/health-services/children-s-health/child-health-services/)

Mínitear sa cháipéis seo faoi na seirbhísí sláinte ginearálta agus sonracha a
bhfuil páistí ina dteideal.

  * [ _Seirbhísí sláinte do leanaí réamhscoile_ ](/ga/health/health-services/children-s-health/health-services-for-preschool-children/)

Cuireann an tseirbhís sláinte phoiblí scagthástáil sláinte saor in aisce ar
fáil do leanaí faoi bhun 6 bliana d’aois. Faisnéis maidir leis an tseirbhís
seo.

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

