English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Airgead agus Cáin ](/ga/money-and-tax/)
> [ Cáin ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Cánacha Caipitil ](/ga/money-and-
tax/tax/capital-taxes/) > Capital Acquisitions Tax exemptions and reliefs

#  Capital Acquisitions Tax exemptions and reliefs

  * Introduction 
  * Capital Acquisitions Tax exemptions 
  * Capital Acquisitions Tax reliefs 
  * How to apply 
  * Contact 

##  Introduction

Capital Acquisitions Tax (CAT) is a tax on gifts and inheritances.

Some gifts and inheritances are exempt from CAT, so the tax does not apply.
For example, if they are from your spouse or civil partner.

There is an exemption for gifts of up €3,000 a year that you get from the same
person.

Some gifts and inheritances get tax relief, which reduces the amount of CAT
you have to pay. For example, there are tax reliefs if a gift or inheritance
is:

  * From your foster parent 
  * From an aunt or uncle whose business you worked in 
  * From a relative of your deceased spouse or civil partner 
  * A business or agricultural property 

This page explains the tax reliefs and exemptions for CAT.

All gifts and inheritances have a tax-free threshold, which means that you can
get a certain amount tax-free. The amount depends on your relationship to the
person you get them from.

[ Read about the tax-free thresholds, how much the tax is and how to pay it
](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/) .

##  Capital Acquisitions Tax exemptions

If a gift or inheritance is exempt from CAT, you do not have pay the tax on it
and it does not count towards your tax-free threshold.

The following are exempt from Capital Acquisitions Tax:

  * Gifts or inheritances from your spouse or civil partner. 
  * Payments for damages or compensation. 
  * If you are permanently incapacitated, benefits you get that are only for paying your medical expenses. 
  * Benefits taken for charitable purposes. 
  * Winnings from a lottery, sweepstake, game or bet. 
  * Retirement benefits, pension and redundancy payments paid to you by your employer. The exemption may not apply if your employer is a relative or a private company you control and the payments are excessive. 
  * Gifts for the [ support, maintenance or education of a child or dependent relative ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-exemptions/support-maintenance-education-payments/index.aspx) of yours or your spouse or civil partner. 
  * An inheritance you get from your child if, in the previous 5 years, they took a gift or inheritance from either parent and it was not exempt from CAT. 
  * A benefit to reduce debt if you are bankrupt or under a debt resolution procedure. 
  * [ Certain heritage property ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-exemptions/heritage-exemption/index.aspx) . 

###  **Small gift exemption**

The first €3,000 of the total value of all gifts from any one person in any
calendar year is exempt. So, you could get a gift from several people in the
same calendar year and the first €3,000 from each person is exempt from CAT.

You do not need to make a Capital Acquisitions Tax return to claim the small
gift exemption for gifts under this limit.

This exemption does not apply to inheritances.

###  **Dwelling house exemption**

If you get a gift or inheritance of a house that has been your main residence,
it may be exempt from tax if you do not own or have an interest in any other
house. There are conditions on how long you must be resident in the house
before and after receiving the benefit. Read more information about the [
Dwelling House Exemption on revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-
gifts-and-inheritance/cat-exemptions/dwelling-house/index.aspx) and in [
Revenue's Manual on the Dwelling House Exemption (pdf).
](http://www.revenue.ie/en/tax-professionals/tdm/capital-acquisitions-tax/cat-
part24.pdf)

###  More information about exemptions

[ You can get further information on CAT exemptions from Revenue
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-
exemptions/index.aspx) .

##  Capital Acquisitions Tax reliefs

###  Foster child relief

You can claim [ foster child ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/adoption-and-
fostering/fostering/) relief for CAT if:

a) You were placed in the care of a foster parent under the [ regulations on
foster care placement
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/si/260/made/en/print) or the [
regulations on placement with a relative
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1995/si/261/made/en/print) .

or

b) You lived with the foster parent and they cared for you at their expense
for at least 5 years. (Before 18 December 2023, this was a necessary
requirement in the case of gifts.)

The Group A threshold applies if you are a foster child of the person who
gives you the gift or inheritance.

Group B applies to a gift or inheritance you get from another foster child
with the same foster parent (since 18 December 2023).

Group B also applies to gifts or inheritances since 18 December 2023 that you
get from your foster parent’s:

  * Child or the child of their civil partner 
  * Brother or sister 
  * Parent, grandparent or great-grandparent 

###  Favourite nephew or niece relief

If you are the nephew or niece of the person who gives you a gift or
inheritance, the Group A tax-free threshold may apply if you have worked in
their business for the previous 5 years.

Being the nephew or niece of the person giving the benefit means that you are
the child of their brother or sister (their sibling) or of their sibling’s
civil partner.

To qualify, you must have worked in the business for more than 24 hours per
week (or 15 hours per week if the only others who worked there were the giver
and their spouse or civil partner).

The relief applies only to assets used in the business. The Group B threshold
applies to non-business assets.

###  Surviving spouse or surviving civil partner relief

This relief applies if your spouse or civil partner has died and you get a
gift or inheritance from someone who was more closely related to them than to
you. In that case, the group threshold that applies to you is based on the
relationship between the giver and your spouse or civil partner.

For example, if you get a benefit from the father of your spouse or civil
partner, the group threshold would be Group C. But if you get a benefit from
the father of your spouse or civil partner and your spouse or civil partner is
deceased, then the group threshold that applies to you would be the same as
for a child getting a benefit from a parent, Group A.

###  Business relief

If you get a gift or inheritance of business property, it may qualify for
relief that reduces the taxable value of the property by 90% for CAT. [ Read
more information about CAT business relief on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-reliefs/business-
relief/index.aspx) .

###  Agricultural relief

Tax relief applies to gifts and inheritances of agricultural property which
reduces the market value of the property by 90% for CAT. [ Read more
information about CAT agricultural relief on revenue.ie
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/gains-gifts-and-inheritance/cat-
reliefs/agricultural-relief/index.aspx) .

##  How to apply

You can claim exemptions or reliefs when you [ make your tax return for CAT
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/#de4018) .

##  Contact

###  An Aonad Náisiúnta Faisnéise CAT do Cháiníocóirí

Oifig na gCoimisinéirí Ioncaim  
An tAonad um Cháin Fháltas Caipitiúil  
9/15 Sráid Uí Chonaill Uachtair  
Baile Átha Cliath 1  
D01 YT32.

**Teil:** 01 738 3673

**Láithreán Gréasáin:** [ https://www.revenue.ie ](https://www.revenue.ie)

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 25 Meitheamh 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-
and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax-exemptions-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Capital%20Acquisitions%20Tax%20exemptions%20and%20reliefs&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-
and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax-exemptions-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-and-
tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax-exemptions-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Capital%20Acquisitions%20Tax%20exemptions%20and%20reliefs&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-
and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax-exemptions-and-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Cáin Fháltais Caipitiúil_ ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-acquisitions-tax/)

Má fhaigheann tú bronntanas, b'fhéidir go mbeidh Cáin Bhronntanais le n-íoc
agat air. Má fhaigheann tú oidhreacht tar éis báis, b'fhéidir go mbeidh Cáin
Oidhreachta le gearradh air. Is cineálacha Cánach Fháltais Caipitiúil iad an
dá cháin seo.

  * [ _Faoisimh agus creidmheasanna cánach i leith tithíochta_ ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/housing-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

Féadfar faoiseamh cánach a éileamh ar réimse chostais tí.

  * [ _Cáin do dhaoine atá ós cionn 65_ ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/)

Tá cur síos anseo ar na socruithe speisialta cánacha a bhaineann le daoine atá
65 agus ós a chionn.

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

