English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Airgead agus Cáin ](/ga/money-and-tax/)
> [ Cáin ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/) > [ Creidmheasanna agus faoiseamh cáin
ioncaim ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) > Separation,
divorce and income tax

#  Separation, divorce and income tax

  * Introduction 
  * Taxation in the year of separation 
  * How to apply 

##  Introduction

If you and your spouse separate, it may change the way you are taxed. The
information here also applies to civil partners who separate.

This page explains how income tax is affected. You can also read about [
capital taxes following separation or divorce ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/capital-
taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-divorce/) .

When a couple separate, they may agree that payments will be made to support a
child or former partner. [ Read about how maintenance payments are taxed
](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/cothabhail-agus-cain/)
.

If you are separated and have a legal agreement for maintenance payments, [
you can choose to continue to be treated as a married couple for tax purposes
](https://www.revenue.ie/en/life-events-and-personal-circumstances/marital-
status/separation-divorce-and-civil-annulment/electing-for-married-or-civil-
partnership-treatment.aspx) .

If you have a child that lives with you for most of the year, you may be
eligible for the [ Single Parent Child Carer Credit ](/ga/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/single-person-child-carer-tax-credit/)
.

##  Taxation in the year of separation

How you are taxed in the year you separate depends on how you were taxed as a
couple.

You may have been taxed under:

  * Joint assessment 
  * Separate assessment 
  * Single assessment 

For more information on these options, read about the [ taxation of married
people and civil partners ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-of-
married-people/) .

###  Joint assessment

Under joint assessment, one person is responsible for making tax returns. They
are called the assessable spouse (or nominated civil partner).

####  If you were the assessable person

You are entitled to the following for the full year in which you separate:

  * The married person’s tax credit 
  * The [ married standard rate tax band ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/#354b71)
  * Employee tax credits for you and your former spouse, if eligible 

You are taxed on your own income for the full year, as well as on your
spouse’s income for the year up until the date of separation.

####  If you were not the assessable person

You will be taxed on the income you earn from the date of separation. You will
be entitled to the full:

  * Single person’s tax credit 
  * Employee tax credit, if eligible 

###  Separate assessment

If you were taxed under separate assessment, your income up to the date of
separation is assessed in the usual way. Unused [ tax credits ](/ga/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/introduction-to-income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/) and [ rate bands ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/#354b71) can be transferred
between you.

For the remainder of the tax year after separation, you will be treated as
single and you get the single person’s tax credit and any other tax credits
you are entitled to.

###  Single assessment

If you were assessed as single persons before you separated, your income tax
assessment will not be affected.

##  How to apply

If you separate and the separation is likely to be permanent, you should [
contact Revenue ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/contact-us/index.aspx) to inform
them of your change in circumstances.

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 3 Meán Fómhair 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Separation%2C%20divorce%20and%20income%20tax&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Separation%2C%20divorce%20and%20income%20tax&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/money-
and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-reliefs/separation-divorce-and-tax-
reliefs/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Cánacha Caipitiúla tar éis scartha/colscartha_ ](/ga/money-and-tax/tax/capital-taxes/capital-taxes-following-separation-or-divorce/)

Cur síos gairid ar an tionchar a bhíonn ag scaradh/colscaradh ar chánacha
Caipitiúla - cáin ar ghnóthacháin caipitiúla, cáin ar fháltais caipitiúla agus
stampdhleacht.

  * [ _How pensions are assessed during a separation, divorce and dissolution_ ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/sep-divorce-pensions/)

When you end a relationship by judicial separation, divorce or dissolution,
the court can decide to share your pension with your former partner and (or)
any dependent children. This is called a pension adjustment order.

  * [ _Scaradh agus Colscaradh: Páistí_ ](/ga/birth-family-relationships/separation-and-divorce/separation-and-divorce-children/)

Cur síos ar cosaint, cumhdach agus insroichteacht

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

