English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Ag filleadh ar Éirinn ](/ga/returning-
to-ireland/) > [ Coming home from another country ](/ga/returning-to-
ireland/country-specific-information/) > Returning to Ireland from the United
States of America

#  Returning to Ireland from the United States of America

  * Introduction 
  * Before you arrive 
  * After you arrive 
  * Taxes 
  * Finding work 
  * Healthcare in Ireland 
  * Social welfare in Ireland 
  * Housing in Ireland 
  * Education in Ireland 
  * More information 

##  Introduction

Before you return to Ireland from the United States of America (US), you may
need help planning your move home. For example, you may have questions about
transferring your medical records to a doctor in Ireland. Or you may have
retirement savings and have questions about taxation.

This page covers the key differences between life in the USA and in Ireland,
and how to plan for your journey home.

##  Before you arrive

###  **Gather important documents**

Make sure you have the following documents for you and your family.

  * Passports (both American and Irish if you have them) 
  * Social security cards 
  * Birth certificates 
  * Marriage certificate 
  * Medical records 
  * Education certificates 
  * Insurance documents 
  * Pet passports 
  * References from previous employers and landlords. 

You may need original documents, but you can use cloud storage to keep copies
safe online.

###  **Managing your US social security benefits and retirement savings**

If you are a United States citizen, you may continue to receive payments while
outside the US. To qualify, you must:

  * Be eligible 
  * Be in a country where the Social Security Administration can send the payments 

The Social Security Administration has a tool to help you [ find out if you
can continue to get your Title II Social Security payments
](https://www.ssa.gov/international/payments_outsideUS.html) .

If you have more questions once you arrive in Ireland, there is [ a list of
contacts and services for people living outside the United States
](https://www.ssa.gov/foreign/index.html) .

##  After you arrive

###  **Opening a bank account**

Before you [ open a bank account in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/opening-a-bank-account/) , you need to show both:

  * [ Proof of identity ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/financial-institutions-and-identification/) (such as a valid passport or driving licence) 
  * Proof of address (such as a recent utility bill). 

In general, this means you can’t open an Irish bank account until you have
arrived home. See ‘Non-resident bank accounts below’ for more details.

**Non-resident bank accounts**

Some banks in Ireland offer ‘non-resident’ accounts. This means you may be
able to set up an Irish bank account before you return home.

You still need to prove your identity (this requirement is set out in [ anti-
money laundering legislation ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-
and-tax/personal-finance/banking/money-laundering-in-ireland/) ), but the bank
may, for example, accept a foreign utility bill, if it has been certified by a
solicitor or police officer.

Different banks have their own requirements, so you should contact your
preferred bank directly for advice.

###  **Types of accounts**

The 2 main types of bank accounts in Ireland are called ‘current accounts’ and
‘deposit accounts.’

####  **Current account**

[ Current accounts ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/banking/opening-a-bank-account/#7b6bd6) are offered by
banks, credit unions, and An Post (the Irish postal service).

####  **Deposit account**

A [ deposit account ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/personal-finance/banking/opening-a-bank-account/#7b6bd6) lets you build up
savings and earn interest on this money. Deposit accounts are offered by banks
and credit unions. They are sometimes called ‘savings accounts.’

###  **Getting a Personal Public Service (PPS) number**

Your [ PPS number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) is a
unique number that helps you access social welfare benefits and public
services in Ireland.

You already have a PPS number if you:

  * Were born in Ireland from 1971 onwards 
  * Started work in Ireland after April 1979 
  * Are getting an Irish social welfare payment 

You must wait until you are back in Ireland to apply for your PPS number. To
apply, you first need to register for a [ basic MyGovID account
](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp) .

When you have your MyGovID account set up, you can [ apply online for a PPS
number ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/identity-services/personal-
public-service-pps-number/) .

**Applying online**

You must wait until you are back in Ireland to apply for your PPS number. To
apply, you first need to register for a [ basic MyGovID account
](https://www.mygovid.ie/en-IE/HowDoISignUp) . You can then [ fill in your
application for a PPS number online using MyWelfare.ie
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/identity-services/personal-public-
service-pps-number/) . **You will need to attend an in-person appointment to
complete your application.**

When you apply online, you will need to upload:

  * Proof of why you need a PPS number 
  * Proof of your address 
  * A copy of your photo identity document (passport, driving licence, ID card, etc.) If you do not have valid documents, you should provide whatever ID documents that you do have. 

The documents you upload need to be clear and easy for someone to read.

####  **If you are outside Ireland, contact Client Identify Services**

You can apply for a PPS number if you are living outside Ireland and need a
PPS number for an [ interaction with a specified body
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/4bc1b4-personal-public-service-number-
register-of-users/) in Ireland. For example, someone who is a [ beneficiary
under an Irish will ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/before-a-
death/making-a-will/) may need to provide a PPS number before they can receive
a grant of probate.

In these cases, you can contact the Department of Social Protection’s, [
Client Identity Services (CIS) ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-
pensions/personal-public-service-number/index.aspx) .

You can contact them by:

  * Email at [ cis@welfare.ie ](mailto:cis@welfare.ie)
  * Telephone 0818 927 999 (or +353 71 9672616, if calling from abroad) 

They will send you the forms to request a new PPSN.

When you have returned these forms, they will then write to you with a
response.

###  **Exchanging a driving license**

US driving licenses cannot be exchanged for an Irish license.

To apply for an Irish license, you need to take the [ driver theory test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driver-theory-test/) . You can find out more
on the [ driver theory test website ](https://dttstore.prometric.com/) .

Once you have your learner permit, you only need to take 6 of the [ essential
driver training (EDT) ](https://www.rsa.ie/services/learner-drivers/driving-
lessons/car-driving-lessons-\(edt\)) lessons instead of the usual 12 lessons.
You will need to complete the Road Safety Authority’s [ application form for
Reduced Essential Driver Training (pdf)
](https://www.ndls.ie/images/Documents/Forms/166459%20RSA%20EDT%20App%20Form_HR_WEB.PDF)
to qualify.

When this is complete, you can [ apply for your driving test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-tests/driving-test/) to get your full Irish
driving licence.

##  Taxes

If you are a US citizen living in Ireland, you still need to file your taxes
with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The IRS has a [ tax guide for US
citizens abroad (pdf) ](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p54.pdf) that can help
you prepare your tax return.

###  **Your US Tax Return**

If you are living in Ireland and earning money from a job, you may qualify to
exclude that income up to an amount that is annually adjusted for inflation.
This is called a [ foreign earned income exclusion
](https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/foreign-earned-
income-exclusion) .

The IRS has an [ Interactive Tax Assistant tool
](https://www.irs.gov/help/ita) to help determine whether your income earned
in Ireland can be excluded from income reported on your tax return.

If you meet certain requirements, you may also qualify for the [ foreign
housing exclusion or deduction.
](https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/foreign-housing-
exclusion-or-deduction)

###  **Taxes in Ireland**

In Ireland, the percentage of tax you pay depends on your income.

The first part of your income, up to a certain amount, is taxed at 20%. This
is known as the _standard rate of tax_ and the amount that it applies to is
known as the _standard rate tax band_ .

The rest of your income is taxed at the _higher rate of tax_ , 40%.

The amount that you can earn before you start to pay the higher rate of tax is
known as your _standard rate cut-off point_ . You can see [ examples of how to
calculate income tax ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/case-study-calculating-your-income-tax-case-studies/) using
these tax rates and the standard rate cut-off point. There is also a [ graph
showing the standard rate cut-off points for 2024
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-
tax-is-calculated/#354b71) .

If you are married or in a [ civil partnership
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-
partnerships/civil-partnerships/) , it may affect your tax bands and tax
reliefs. [ Read more about taxation of married people and civil partners
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-
of-married-people/) .

##  Finding work

If you are an Irish citizen returning home, you can work without a visa or
employment permit. If you are [ bringing family members
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-
ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-family-members/) to
live in Ireland who are from outside the EEA, Switzerland or the UK, they may
have to apply for a visa or preclearance to enter Ireland.

If your family members are from outside the European Economic Area (EEA),
Switzerland, or the United Kingdom, you should [ check if you need a visa to
come to Ireland ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/visas-
for-ireland/visa-requirements-for-entering-ireland/#16e51d) . They will have
to [ apply for an employment permit
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-
ireland/employment-permits/overview-employment-permits/) to work in Ireland.
Non-EEA citizens who already live in Ireland and have certain types of
immigration permission can work without an employment permit. You also might
not need an employment permit if you are joining your family in Ireland.

  * [ Family members of EU/EEA citizens ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-eu-national/) can apply for a residence card. If the application is successful, you can get an Irish Residence Permit (IRP) with a Stamp 4EUFAM, which gives you the right to work without an employment permit. 
  * [ Family members of UK citizens ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/government-in-ireland/ireland-and-the-uk/residence-rules-UK-citizens/) who move to Ireland after 1 January 2021 can apply for residency and permission to work. 
  * [ Family members of people who have been granted refugee or subsidiary protection status ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-refugees/refugee-status-and-leave-to-remain/family-reunification-for-refugees-in-ireland/) following an application for international protection can apply to come to Ireland through family reunification. If successful, you can get a Stamp 4 IRP, which allows you to work without an employment permit. 
  * [ Family members of Critical Skills Employment Permit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/employment/migrant_workers/employment_permits/spousal_work_permit_scheme.en.html) holders can get a Stamp 1G, which allows you to work without an employment permit. 
  * [ Family members of Irish citizens ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/residency-and-citizenship/returning-to-ireland-with-your-non-eea-spouse/) can apply for residence in Ireland. If successful, you will get a Stamp 4 IRP, which allows you to work without an employment permit. 

###  Where to look for work

You should regularly check these sources for new job opportunities:

####  Your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare branch office

Visit or call [ your local Intreo centre
](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-offices/map/?) for
information and advice on job vacancies. You can read more about [ employment
services for jobseekers ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/social-welfare-payments/unemployed-people/employment-supports/) .

####  Websites

The [ Jobs Ireland ](http://www.jobsireland.ie/) website lists jobs available
in Ireland and abroad. It also lists internships and employment programme
vacancies. You can upload your CV so employers can access it and contact you
directly.

####  Social media

Some social media sites post job vacancies and connect jobseekers with
employers. Some employers share job opportunities on their company's social
media accounts.

####  Recruitment agencies

The National Recruitment Federation (NRF) has a directory of recruitment
agencies. You often need to register with these private companies, who may get
a fee from the employer if you get the job. Contact specialist recruitment
agencies if you are looking for a particular type of work.

####  Open days and recruitment days

Some employers and industries hold open days to recruit staff. Find out about
these events online or in local newspapers.

####  Company websites

Visit the websites of companies relevant to your area of work. They may only
advertise vacancies on their own website.

##  Healthcare in Ireland

Both private and public healthcare services are available in Ireland.

###  **Public health services**

The State provides public health services. Many public health services are
free of charge, but in some cases, there may be a fee.

The [ Health Service Executive (HSE)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/health-service-
executive/) is responsible for delivering public health services. Sometimes
the HSE provides these services directly and sometimes the HSE funds other
organisations to provide these services.

You are covered by public health services if you have been living in Ireland
for at least one year or if you intend to live here for at least one year.
This is called being [ ordinarily resident in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-
public-health-services/#094550) .

###  **Private health services**

Either individual health professionals or healthcare companies provide private
healthcare services. Typically, you pay the full cost of private healthcare
services, but you can buy [ private health insurance
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/private-health-
insurance/) to help cover the cost.

Arrangements vary from one company to another, but most private healthcare
companies have agreements with hospitals to pay the hospital directly. In
general, for outpatient costs you pay the health professional and then claim
back from the health insurance company. You should check with your own company
as to their procedures.

The following companies offer voluntary private health insurance in Ireland:

  * [ Irish Life Health ](http://www.irishlifehealth.ie/)
  * [ Laya Healthcare ](http://www.layahealthcare.ie/)
  * [ Vhi Healthcare ](http://www.vhi.ie/)
  * [ HSF Health Plan ](http://www.hsf.ie/) (provides [ cash benefit plans ](http://www.hia.ie/consumer-information/fixed-health-insurance-cash-plans) but not in-patient health insurance) 

###  **General Practitioners (GPs)**

[ General Practitioners (GPs)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-services/gp-and-
hospital-services/gps-and-private-patients/) are family doctors.

In Ireland, GPs provide broad services to patients on all health issues and
can refer you to see specialists or hospital consultants if needed. Most GPs
in Ireland are private practitioners, but the majority provide services on
behalf of the HSE.

You can find a GP in your local area using the HSE’s [ Service Finder Map
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/find-a-gp/) .

You do not need a PPS number or other documents to visit a GP.

##  Social welfare in Ireland

###  **Irish social security benefits**

In Ireland, social security benefits are known as ‘social welfare payments’.
These social welfare payments provide financial support to people who are
disabled, retired, sick, unemployed, or raising children on their own.

There are 3 main types of social welfare payments:

  * Social insurance payments 
  * Social assistance payments (also known as [ means-tested ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/means-test/) payments) 
  * Universal payments 

You will need to meet certain requirements to qualify for these social welfare
payments. You can read more [ examples and details about each type
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-system-in-ireland/) .

###  **What are the rules covering payments?**

The rules for social welfare payments are set out in the legislation and
operational guidelines. You can find most of the [ operational guidelines for
specific social welfare payments on gov.ie
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/97885-operational-guidelines/) .

###  **Can I appeal a decision?**

Yes, [ you can appeal a decision
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/) within 21 days of the decision letter.

##  Housing in Ireland

###  **Buying a home**

The process of buying a home in Ireland involves several steps. Before you
decide to buy, make sure you’ve done the following:

####  **Find out what you can afford**

Make a budget, and include insurance, legal fees, monthly mortgage payments,
and [ stamp duty ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/buying-a-home/stamp-duty/) .

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has a [ budget
planner ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/budget-planner/)
that you can use to see how much you can afford each month.

Generally, you can borrow 4 times your income if you are a first-time buyer.
The limit is 3.5 times your gross annual income if you are not a first-time
buyer.

Read more in our [ step-by-step guide to buying a home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/steps-involved-buying-a-home/) .

####  **Get a solicitor (lawyer)**

You will need to hire a solicitor to do _conveyancing_ . This is the legal
worked involved in buying a house.

Since conveyancing charges can vary between solicitors, contact several
different solicitors to compare prices.

You can use the [ Law Society’s “Find a Solicitor” search tool
](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search) .

####  **Get mortgage approval**

A [ mortgage ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) is a long-term loan
secured against the property you buy. This means if you don’t repay your
mortgage, you may lose your home.

There are different types of mortgages and different mortgage providers. You
should contact several different mortgage providers to find out who can offer
you the best deal.

The [ CCPC has information on choosing the best mortgage
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/mortgages/) for you.

You can also use the CCPC [ mortgage calculator
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/mortgage-
calculators/mortgage-calculator/) to check what your monthly repayments will
be. The amount depends on:

  * The amount you borrow 
  * How long the mortgage will last 
  * The interest rate 

###  **Renting a home**

In Ireland, the term “renting” is usually used in everyday conversation.
Sometimes, you might hear words like “tenancy agreement” and “lease” used as
well.

Consider these questions before viewing places to rent:

  * How much can you afford in rent and bills? 
  * What is the standard of the accommodation? 
  * What is the [ Building Energy Rating (BER) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/) of the property? 
  * Where is the property located? Is it near your work or college? 
  * How long do you plan to stay there? 
  * Do you want to share a bedroom, bathroom or kitchen? 

####  **Residential Tenancies Board (RTB)**

The RTB is an independent public body that:

  * Registers tenancies 
  * Resolves disputes 
  * Regulates the residential rental sector 

The RTB has a helpful list of [ rights and responsibilities for renters
](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/rights-and-
responsibilities/tenant-rights-and-responsibilities) .

Landlords cannot discriminate against you as a potential tenant.

Read more about [ your equality rights when renting in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/looking-for-a-
flat-or-house-to-rent/#b21d4f) .

####  **What are the rules about deposits?**

You cannot be forced to make upfront payments of more than 2 month’s rent.
This includes a deposit of a month’s rent and one month’s rent in advance.

If you are getting a social welfare payment and are unable to pay the deposit,
the Department of Social Protection may be able to [ help with paying a
deposit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-
payments/supplementary-welfare-schemes/additional-needs-payment/) .

You should get a receipt for any deposit you pay. You may lose your deposit if
you don’t give proper notice, cause damage to the property or leave without
paying bills or rent.

You can read more about [ tenants’ rights and responsibilities
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-
and-responsibilities/tenants-rights-and-obligations/) .

##  Education in Ireland

The Irish education system includes:

  * [ Primary school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-primary-school/starting-primary-school/) (sometimes called national school) 
  * [ Post-primary school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/starting-post-primary-school/) (often called secondary school) 

Many people choose to continue after post-primary school to [ further
education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/vocational_education_and_training/)
and [ third-level education
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third_level_education/) .

###  **Primary and post-primary education**

There are 2 types of primary schools in Ireland:

  * **National primary schools** (often called ‘national schools’) that are funded by the State and do not charge fees 
  * **Private primary schools** , which do charge fees 

Most children in Ireland go to a State-funded national primary school.

There are 3 types of post-primary or secondary schools:

  * **Voluntary secondary schools** are privately owned and managed, usually by religious institutions, a charitable trust, or a private charitable company 
  * **Community colleges** that are managed by the local Education and Training Board (ETB) 
  * **Community schools** that have been established by one or more private or religious patrons coming together and having ETB sponsorship or resulting from combining several voluntary secondary and ETB schools together 

Children usually start post-primary school when they are 12 or 13 years old.
Most children attend State-funded post-primary schools, which do not charge a
fee.

####  **Finding a school**

You can find primary and post-primary schools by type and location using the
Department of Education’s [ Find a School tool
](https://www.education.ie/en/Find-a-School/) . This tool can filter your
search results by ethos, language of instruction, and gender. You will see a
map showing schools that meet your selection.

Most schools have a website with information about their ethos, policies,
curriculum, and extra-curricular activities on offer. You can also contact a
school directly for more information.

####  **Applying to a school**

You should apply to the school in writing. If they don’t have an application
form, you can apply by letter or email.

All schools must publish an ‘admissions notice’ and an ‘admissions policy.’

The **admissions notice** tells you:

  * When the school will start accepting applications for the year (when to apply) 
  * When you will get the decision on your application 
  * When you must accept a place 

The **admissions policy** describes the rules the school will follow for
selecting students and how they make their decisions. It also states what
happens if the school has no space for new students (sometimes referred to as
'over-subscribed').

###  **Higher and further education**

A wide range of institutions provide third-level education in Ireland. The
university sector, the technological sector, and colleges of education are
substantially funded by the State. There are also a number of independent
private colleges.

If you are thinking of [ going to college
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/colleges-and-qualifications/going-to-college/) you can search the [
Qualifax website ](http://www.qualifax.ie/) for details on courses. Generally,
applications for undergraduate courses in Ireland are made through the [
Central Applications Office (CAO). ](http://www.cao.ie/) You can find more
information in our documents on [ application procedures and entry
requirements ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
, [ third-level fees ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-
level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/) , and [ tax
relief for third-level fees.
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)

If you think you might qualify for a grant, you can read more about [
maintenance grant schemes for students on third-level courses
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/) and [ grants and
funds available for mature students
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-students/) .

##  More information

Visit our [ Returning to Ireland portal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/) for more
information to plan your journey.

If you have family members returning with you, visit our pages on [ residence
rights of family members ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/) and [ coming home with children
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-
children/) .

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 13 Lúnasa 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
states-of-america/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20from%20the%20United%20States%20of%20America&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
states-of-america/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-to-
ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
states-of-america/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20from%20the%20United%20States%20of%20America&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-the-united-
states-of-america/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Ag filleadh ar Éirinn ón Ríocht Aontaithe_ ](/ga/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/ag-filleadh-ar-eirinn-on-riocht-aontaithe/)

Más saoránach Éireannach thú atá ag filleadh ón Ríocht Aontaithe, is féidir
leis an leathanach seo faisnéis a sholáthar duit ar ábhair lena n-áirítear
pinsin na RA, cúram sláinte agus tithíocht. Tá eolas ar an leathanach seo
freisin faoi oideachas agus obair a aimsiú in Éirinn.

  * [ _Ag filleadh ar Éirinn ó Cheanada_ ](/ga/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/ag-filleadh-go-heirinn-o-ceanada/)

Is féidir leis an leathanach seo cabhrú leat má tá tú i do chónaí i gCeanada
faoi láthair agus má tá sé beartaithe agat filleadh ar Éirinn. Díríonn an
t-eolas ar réimsí mar chánacha, leas sóisialach, tithíocht agus gnéithe
praiticiúla eile.

  * [ _Returning to Ireland from Australia_ ](/ga/returning-to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-australia/)

Irish citizens living in Australia will find details on this page about topics
that will help them plan a return to Ireland. Areas covered include Irish and
Australian taxes, social welfare benefits, exchanging a driver’s licence, and
finding a place to live once you are back.

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

