English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Ag filleadh ar Éirinn ](/ga/returning-
to-ireland/) > [ Coming home from another country ](/ga/returning-to-
ireland/country-specific-information/) > Returning to Ireland from Australia

#  Returning to Ireland from Australia

  * Introduction 
  * Setting up an Irish bank account 
  * Taxes 
  * Social welfare (benefits) in Ireland 
  * Exchanging your driver’s licence 
  * Getting healthcare in Ireland 
  * Finding somewhere to live 
  * Education in Ireland 
  * Further information 

##  Introduction

If you are returning home to Ireland from Australia, this page covers common
questions and other practical matters to make your transition a smooth one.
For example, there is information on Irish taxes, how to set up a bank
account, and what to do about any Australian pensions you may have.

##  Setting up an Irish bank account

Before you [ open a bank account in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-
finance/banking/opening-a-bank-account/) , you need to provide:

  * [ Proof of identity ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/banking/financial-institutions-and-identification/) (such as a valid passport or driving licence) 
  * Proof of address (such as a recent utility bill). 

Some banks in Ireland offer [ ‘non-resident’ accounts
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/organising-your-
finances/banking-and-returning-to-ireland/#6b097b) . This means you might be
able to set up an Irish bank account before you return home. Different banks
have their own requirements, so you should contact your preferred bank
directly for advice.

###  **Types of bank accounts**

There are two main bank account types in Ireland: ‘current accounts’ and
‘deposit accounts.’ The differences between them include the services
available, the amount of interest paid, and the access you have to the
account.

####  **Current account**

Current accounts are offered by banks, credit unions, and An Post (the Irish
postal service).

A current account lets you:

  * Pay your bills by direct debit or standing order 
  * Get automated payments such as salary, wages or benefits 
  * Transfer money in a branch, by telephone, or through a mobile or online banking service 
  * Pay for things with a debit card or a digital wallet 
  * Withdraw money from ATMs 
  * Keep track of your spending 
  * Access an [ overdraft ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/personal-finance/loans-and-credit/overdrafts/) (short-term borrowing through your current account) 

####  **Deposit account**

A deposit account lets you build up savings and earn interest on this money.
Deposit accounts are offered by banks and credit unions. They are sometimes
called ‘savings accounts.’

For some accounts, you make deposits at regular times, usually monthly. These
are called ‘regular savings accounts.’

Before you open a deposit account, you should know what rate of interest you
can earn on your savings. You should also find out how you can access your
money if you need it. Some deposit accounts may have restrictions on how soon
or how often you can withdraw money.

A deposit account is not your only option. You can save money in other ways,
for example, through [ State Savings ](https://www.statesavings.ie/) .

##  Taxes

This section includes general tax information if you get a job when you return
to Ireland. You should contact a financial expert for specific information
relating to your circumstances.

The Australian Tax Office (ATO) has launched an [ online platform
](https://community.ato.gov.au/s/) that lets you ask questions about tax and
super issues with other community members. ATO moderators certify answers as
correct.

###  **Managing your Australian tax**

It’s important to determine if you are an Australian resident for tax
purposes. You can use the ATO’s [ online tool for determining the residency
status of people leaving Australia ](https://www.ato.gov.au/single-page-
applications/calculatorsandtools?anchor=DORSLA#DORSLA/questions) .

If you're an Australian resident for tax purposes, you need to declare all
income earned both in Australia and in Ireland on your Australian tax return,
even if you have already paid tax on it here in Ireland.

Since Ireland and Australia have a dual tax agreement, you are entitled to a
foreign income tax offset (FITO) if the following conditions are met:

  * The [ Irish taxes you have paid must be income tax ](https://www.ato.gov.au/forms-and-instructions/foreign-income-tax-offset-rules-guide-2023/when-a-foreign-income-tax-offset-applies?anchor=Taxmusthavebeenpaidordeemedtohavebeenpai#Foreign_tax_must_be_foreign_income_tax)
  * You must have [ actually paid ](https://www.ato.gov.au/forms-and-instructions/foreign-income-tax-offset-rules-guide-2023/when-a-foreign-income-tax-offset-applies?anchor=Taxmusthavebeenpaidordeemedtohavebeenpai#Taxmusthavebeenpaidordeemedtohavebeenpai) , or be deemed to have paid, [ Irish income tax ](https://www.ato.gov.au/forms-and-instructions/foreign-income-tax-offset-rules-guide-2023/when-a-foreign-income-tax-offset-applies?anchor=Foreign_tax_must_be_foreign_income_tax#Foreign_tax_must_be_foreign_income_tax)
  * The income or gain on which you paid Irish income tax must be included in your [ assessable income ](https://www.ato.gov.au/forms-and-instructions/foreign-income-tax-offset-rules-guide-2023/when-a-foreign-income-tax-offset-applies?anchor=Foreignincometaxmusthavebeenpaidonyourin#Foreignincometaxmusthavebeenpaidonyourin) (or your [ non-assessable non-exempt (NANE) income ](https://www.ato.gov.au/forms-and-instructions/foreign-income-tax-offset-rules-guide-2023/foreign-income-tax-paid-by-a-controlled-foreign-company?anchor=Foreign_income_tax_paid_on_NANE_income#Foreign_income_tax_paid_on_NANE_income) ) for Australian income tax purposes 

####  **The Foreign Income Tax Offset (FITO)**

You can claim the FITO in your tax return. If the amount is more than $1,000,
then you will need to determine your foreign income tax offset limit. The ATO
provides [ a step-by-step guide ](https://www.ato.gov.au/forms-and-
instructions/foreign-income-tax-offset-rules-guide-2023/calculate-your-fito-
or-offset-limit#ato-Calculateyouroffsetlimit) to help you calculate this
amount.

If you have a [ myGov account linked to the ATO
](https://www.ato.gov.au/online-services/online-services-for-individuals-and-
sole-traders/ato-online-services-and-mygov/create-a-mygov-account-and-link-it-
to-the-ato) , you can access your account from overseas to:

  * Prepare and lodge your tax return 
  * Manage and check your super 
  * Manage your contact details and other tax obligations 

####  **Taxes in Ireland**  

If you plan to work when you are back in Ireland, you should know how your
income will be taxed. Tax in Ireland is charged as a percentage of your
income. The percentage you pay depends on how much you earn.

The first part of your income, up to a certain amount, is taxed at 20%. This
is known as the _standard rate of tax,_ and the amount that it applies to is
known as the _standard rate tax band_ .

The rest of your income is taxed at 40% and is called the _higher rate of tax_
.

The amount you can earn before you start to pay the higher rate of tax is
known as your _standard rate cut-off point_ . You can see [ examples of how to
calculate income tax ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-
tax/tax/income-tax/case-study-calculating-your-income-tax-case-studies/) using
these tax rates and the standard rate cut-off point.

If you are married or in a [ civil partnership
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/birth-family-relationships/civil-
partnerships/civil-partnerships/) and both of you plan to work in Ireland, it
may affect your tax bands and tax reliefs.

[ Read more about taxation of married people and civil partners
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/taxation-
of-married-people/) .

##  Social welfare (benefits) in Ireland

###  **PPS numbers**

When you return to Ireland, you will need a [ Personal Public Service (PPS)
number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/personal-public-service-number/) to access social welfare
benefits and many public services. A PPS number (sometimes called a ‘PPSN’) is
always 7 numbers followed by either one or 2 letters.

You already have a PPS number if you:

  * Were born in Ireland from 1971 onwards 
  * Started work in Ireland after 1979 
  * Are getting an Irish social welfare payment 

If you have never had one before, see which [ documents you’ll need to apply
for a PPS number ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-
ireland/applying-for-social-welfare/pps-numbers-for-returning-irish-emigrants-
and-families/#e98839) .

####  **Applying online for a PPS number**  

You can [ apply online for a PPS number using MyWelfare.ie
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/identity-services/personal-public-
service-pps-number/) if you are living in Ireland and are at least 18 years
old. You will need to attend an in-person appointment to complete your
application.

When you apply online, you need to upload:

  * Proof of why you need a PPS number 
  * Proof of your address 
  * A copy of your photo identity document (passport, driving licence, ID card, and so on) 

If you do not have valid documents, you should provide whatever ID documents
that you do have

Make sure the documents you upload are easy for someone to read.

####  **Applying from outside Ireland**

You can apply for a PPS number if you are living outside Ireland and need a
PPS number to [ interact with a specified body
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/4bc1b4-personal-public-service-number-
register-of-users/) in Ireland. For example, if you are a [ beneficiary under
an Irish will ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/death/before-a-
death/making-a-will/) , you may need to provide a PPS number before a grant of
probate can issue.

If you need a PPS number as a non-resident and can’t attend a PPS Registration
Centre, you can [ contact the Department of Social Protection’s Client
Identify Services ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/jobs-and-pensions/personal-
public-service-number/index.aspx) .

You cannot use this service if you are living in Ireland or intend to relocate
to Ireland for any period.

You can find more information about [ applying for a PPS number from outside
Ireland ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/12e6de-get-a-personal-public-service-
pps-number/#applying-for-a-pps-number-if-you-are-living-outside-ireland) on
gov.ie.

###  **Australian social security payments in Ireland**

Ireland has a social security agreement with Australia that allows people to
move between the countries and protect their pension entitlements.

Where a person has worked in both Ireland and Australia, the rate of pension
is determined on a pro-rata basis. This means that each country pays a partial
pension, based on a formula that uses the contribution record from both
countries.

You can find [ answers to frequently asked question about the agreement
](https://www.dss.gov.au/about-the-department/international/international-
social-security-agreements/current-international-social-security-
agreements/australia-and-ireland-frequently-asked-questions) on the Australian
Department of Social Services website.

If you are receiving an Australian pension and return to Ireland, Services
Australia will pay it into your nominated Irish bank account every 4 weeks.
Payments to customers in Ireland are in Euros. Claims and questions about the
Agreement are handled by [ Centrelink International Services
](http://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/services/centrelink/international-
services?utm_id=7) in Australia.

##  Exchanging your driver’s licence

If you have an Australian driving licence, you can exchange it for an Irish
licence. To exchange the licence, you can:

  * [ Apply online ](https://www.ndls.ie/licensed-driver/exchange-my-foreign-driving-licence.html#to-apply-online-to-exchange-a-foreign-driving-licence-issued-by-a-recognised-state)
  * [ Apply in-person at a National Driver Licence Service (NDLS) centre ](https://www.ndls.ie/how-to-apply/applying-in-person.html#evidence-of-normal-residence)

All Australian licence exchange applications need to include a Letter of
Entitlement (sometimes called a ‘driver’s statement’). This Letter of
Entitlement is a record of your driving history. You can get this from the
road traffic authority of the State or Territory that issued your licence.

You can find a [ contact list for each driver licensing authority in Australia
](https://ireland.embassy.gov.au/dubl/DrivingLicenceInformation.html) on the
embassy website.

If you are exchanging an Australian licence from the following territories,
you will be restricted to driving automatic vehicles:

  * Australian Capital Territory 
  * New South Wales 
  * Northern Territory 
  * South Australia 
  * Tasmania 
  * Victoria (see below) 

Make sure that the Letter of Entitlement submitted in support of your
application indicates whether you took your driving test in a vehicle with
manual or automatic transmission. If your driving test was taken in an
automatic vehicle, you can only drive an automatic vehicle.

If the road traffic authority that issued your licence can provide
confirmation that you completed your test on a vehicle with manual
transmission, you will not be restricted to driving only automatic vehicles.

####  **Victoria**  

If you are exchanging your driving licence from the Vic Roads licensing
authority, you will need to sign a consent form to allow Vic Roads to release
information to the NDLS if required. Please ensure that you complete the
Applicant Details and Individual/Organisation sections of the [ consent form
](https://www.ndls.ie/images/Documents/DrivingLicence/Consent_to_release_information_from_VicRoads_records.pdf?v=20220825)

####  **Can I exchange my expired licence?**

You can exchange your Australian licence up to one year after it has expired,
and you will need to have a letter of entitlement.

##  Getting healthcare in Ireland

Like in Australia, Ireland has both public and private health services.
Ireland provides public healthcare services through the [ Health Service
Executive (HSE) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-
system/health-service-executive/) .

###  **Public healthcare services**

The HSE delivers health and personal social services through medical
professionals and hospitals and through a network of [ Local Health Offices
](http://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/1/LHO/) , health centres, and clinics at
the community level.

You can access HSE public health services if you have been living in Ireland
for at least a year, or if you plan to live here for at least one year. This
is called being [ ordinarily resident in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/health/health-system/entitlement-to-
public-health-services/) .

To check that you are ordinarily resident, the HSE may ask for:

  * Proof of property purchase or rental, including evidence that the property is your principal residence (for example, proof of rent) 
  * A letter or statement from a financial institution (for example, a bank statement) 
  * A current utility bill (such as a gas, electricity, or phone bill) 
  * A current car or home insurance policy in your name 
  * An official document from a government department (for example, a notice of assessment from Revenue) 

The above documents need to be dated within the last 12 months.

###  **Private healthcare services**

Health insurance is used to pay for private care in hospital or from health
professionals in hospitals or in their practices.

The arrangements vary from one company to another, but most companies have
agreements with hospitals to pay the hospital directly. In general, for
outpatient costs you pay the health professional and then claim back from the
health insurance company. You should check with your own company as to their
procedures.

The following companies offer voluntary private health insurance in Ireland:

  * [ Irish Life Health ](http://www.irishlifehealth.ie/)
  * [ Laya Healthcare ](http://www.layahealthcare.ie/)
  * [ Vhi Healthcare ](http://www.vhi.ie/)
  * [ HSF Health Plan ](http://www.hsf.ie/) (provides [ cash benefit plans ](http://www.hia.ie/consumer-information/fixed-health-insurance-cash-plans) but not in-patient health insurance) 

The [ Health Insurance Authority ](https://www.hia.ie/) provides independent
information about health insurance, including a tool to compare different
plans.

###  **General practitioners (GPs)**

General practitioners (GPs) are family doctors. A GP is often the first doctor
people see about a health problem.

GPs provide referrals to more specialised doctors called consultants. You
cannot see a consultant for the first time without a referral from a GP.

You can [ find a GP in your area with HSE Service Finder Map
](https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/gp/) . Some GPs will also arrange
home visits.

##  Finding somewhere to live

###  **Buying a home**

There are several steps in the process of buying a home in Ireland. Before
choosing to buy, make sure you have done the following:

####  **Find out what you can afford**

Review your budget and find out how much you can afford in monthly mortgage
repayments. You should ensure that you have enough to cover all the [ costs
involved in buying a home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/costs-of-buying-a-home/) , for example, mortgage costs, legal fees,
insurance, and stamp duty.

The amount of money you can get as a mortgage loan, and the amount you need as
a deposit, are governed by Central Bank lending limits – see our page on [
Taking out a mortgage ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-
a-home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) for details of these
rules.

The Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (CCPC) has a [ budget
planner ](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/budget-planner/)
that you can use to see how much you can afford each month.

####  **Get a solicitor**

While you are looking for a property, you should hire a solicitor to do the
_conveyancing_ . Conveyancing is the legal work involved in buying or selling
property. Conveyancing charges can vary between solicitors, so it is worth
contacting several solicitors to compare prices.

You can use the [ Law Society’s website ](https://www.lawsociety.ie/Find-a-
Solicitor/Solicitor-Firm-Search/) to find a solicitor in your area.

####  **Get mortgage approval**

A [ mortgage ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-
home/help-with-buying-a-home/taking-out-a-mortgage/) is a long-term loan
secured against the property you buy. This means if you don’t repay your
mortgage, you may lose your home.

There are different types of mortgages and different mortgage providers. You
should contact several mortgage providers to find out who can offer you the
best deal.

The CCPC has [ information on choosing the best mortgage for you
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/money/mortgages/) .

You can also use the CCPC [ mortgage calculator
](https://www.ccpc.ie/consumers/tools-and-calculators/mortgage-
calculators/mortgage-calculator/) to check what your monthly repayments will
be. The amount depends on:

  * The amount you borrow 
  * How long the mortgage will last 
  * The interest rate 

You can read more on our page about [ the steps involved in buying a home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-
home/steps-involved-buying-a-home/) .

###  **Renting a home in Ireland**

In Ireland, the term ‘renting’ is usually used in everyday conversation.
Sometimes, you might hear words like ‘letting’, ‘tenancy agreement’, and
‘lease’ used as well.

To make sure you find somewhere that suits you, consider these questions
before viewing places to rent:

  * How much can you afford in rent and bills? 
  * What is the standard of the accommodation? 
  * What is the [ Building Energy Rating (BER) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/getting-a-building-energy-rating-for-your-home/) of the property? 
  * What is the location of the property? Is it near to your work or college? 
  * How long do you plan to stay there? 
  * Do you want to share a bedroom, bathroom, or kitchen? 

####  **What are the rules about deposits?**

You cannot be required to make upfront payments of more than 2 month’s rent.
This includes a deposit of a month’s rent and one month’s rent in advance.

You should get a receipt for any deposit you pay. Your [ rent book
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/tenants-rights-
and-responsibilities/rent-books/) should state how much of a deposit you paid.

You may lose your deposit if:  

  * You leave without giving proper notice, or leave before the end of a fixed-term lease 
  * You cause damage to the accommodation beyond [ normal wear and tear ](https://www.rtb.ie/during-a-tenancy/wear-and-tear)
  * You leave with bills or rent unpaid 

####  **What are letting agencies?**

Letting agencies (sometimes called ‘accommodation agencies’) are commercial
organisations that can help you find private rented accommodation. They may
charge you a fee.

Before registering with an agency, you should find out the following:

  * Is the agency licensed? 
  * What services does it offer? 
  * If you pay a fee, in what circumstances will you get a refund? 
  * If you decide to register with the agency, make sure you get a receipt for any money you pay. 

Read our page about [ what to consider when viewing rented accommodation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/looking-for-a-
flat-or-house-to-rent/#633bfe) .

**Residential Tenancies Board (RTB)  
**  
The [ Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) ](http://www.rtb.ie/) helps to resolve
[ disputes between landlords and tenants
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting-a-home/resolving-
disputes/disputes-between-landlords-and-tenants/) , including any disputes
about deposits. It has published a [ Good Landlord/Tenant Guide (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/general/Good_Landlord_Tenant_Guide_V4.pdf)
with general information for landlords and tenants.

The RTB also has a helpful list of [ rights and responsibilities for renters
](https://www.rtb.ie/registration-and-compliance/rights-and-
responsibilities/tenant-rights-and-responsibilities) .

##  Education in Ireland

###  **Primary and post-primary education**

Usually, children start primary school when they are 5 years of age. They
start in September – the beginning of the school year.There are 2 types of
primary schools in Ireland:

  * National primary schools (often called ‘national schools’) are funded by the State and do not charge fees 
  * Private primary schools, which charge fees. 

Most children in Ireland go to a State-funded national primary school.

Children usually start post-primary school when they are 12 or 13 years of
age.

There are 3 types of post-primary (or secondary) schools:

  * **Voluntary secondary schools** are privately owned and managed, usually by religious institutions, a charitable trust, or a private charitable company 
  * **Community colleges** that are managed by the local Education and Training Board (ETB) 
  * **Community schools** that were established by one or more private or religious patrons coming together and have ETB sponsorship or result from several voluntary secondary and ETB schools combining 

Most children attend State-funded post-primary schools which do not charge a
fee.

####  **Finding a school**

To find a school, you can search primary and post-primary schools by type and
location using the Department of Education’s [ Find a School tool
](https://www.education.ie/en/Find-a-School/) .

You can filter your search results by ethos, language of instruction, and
gender. You will see a map showing schools that meet your selection.

Most schools have a website with information about their ethos, policies,
curriculum, and extra-curricular activities. You can also contact a school
directly for more information.

####  **Applying to a school**

You should apply to the school in writing. If they don’t have an application
form, you can apply by letter or email.

All schools must publish an admissions notice and an admissions policy.

The **admissions notice** tells you:

  * When the school will start accepting applications for the year (when to apply) 
  * When you will get the decision on your application 
  * When you must accept a place 

The **admissions policy** describes the rules the school will follow for
selecting students and how they make their decisions. It also states what
happens if the school has no space for new students (sometimes referred to as
'over-subscribed').

###  **Higher and further education**

A wide range of institutions provide third-level education in Ireland. The
university sector, the technological sector, and colleges of education are
substantially funded by the State. In addition, there are a number of
independent private colleges.

If you are thinking of [ going to college
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/colleges-and-qualifications/going-to-college/) , you can search the
[ Qualifax website ](http://www.qualifax.ie/) for details on courses.
Generally, applications for undergraduate courses in Ireland are made through
the [ Central Applications Office (CAO). ](http://www.cao.ie/)

You can find more information in our pages on:

  * [ Application procedures and entry requirements ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/applying-to-college/application-procedures-and-entry-requirements/)
  * [ Third-level fees ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/fees/)
  * [ Tax relief for third-level fees. ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/tax-relief-for-third-level-fees/)

If you think you might qualify for a grant, you can read more about:

  * [ Maintenance grant schemes for students on third-level courses ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/)
  * [ Grants and funds available for mature students ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-and-supports-for-third-level-education/grants-for-mature-students/)

##  Further information

Visit our [ Returning to Ireland portal
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/) for more
information to plan your journey.

If you’re returning with family members, visit our pages on [ residence rights
of family members ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-
country/moving-to-ireland/rights-of-residence-in-ireland/residence-rights-of-
family-members/) and [ coming home with children
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-
children/) .

##  We value your feedback!

×

Your input is crucial in helping us improve our services for those returning
to Ireland. Please take a moment to fill out our RTI survey.

[ Take the RTI EU Survey
](https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/ReturningtoIreland)

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 2 Iúil 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-
australia/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20from%20Australia&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-
australia/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-to-
ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-
australia/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Returning%20to%20Ireland%20from%20Australia&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/returning-
to-ireland/country-specific-information/returning-to-ireland-from-
australia/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Teacht ar áit éigin le maireachtáil ar fhilleadh duit go hÉirinn_ ](/ga/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/finding-somewhere-to-live-on-your-return-to-ireland/)

Soláthraíonn an doiciméad seo faisnéis faoi chóiríocht a aimsiú nuair a
fhilleann tú ar Éirinn.

  * [ _Returning to Ireland and working in construction_ ](/ga/returning-to-ireland/starting-work/returning-to-ireland-and-working-in-construction/)

Provides information on careers in construction, Safepass, certifications, and
recognition of foreign qualifications, as well as details about trade unions,
wages, and pensions for those returning to Ireland and seeking to begin or
continue work in the construction industry.

  * [ _Ag filleadh ar Éirinn agus leanbh a thabhairt ar an saol_ ](/ga/returning-to-ireland/coming-home-with-children/returning-to-ireland-and-having-a-baby/)

Tugtar breac-chuntas ar na seirbhísí cúraim mháithreachais phoiblí ar féidir
leat rochtain a fháil orthu nuair a fhilleann tú ar Éirinn agus ar do
theidlíochtaí chun saoire a thógáil ón obair nuair a bhíonn leanbh agat.

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

