English  | **Gaeilge**

**Anseo atá tú:** [ Baile ](/ga/) > [ Leas Sóisialach ](/ga/social-welfare/) >
[ Córas Leasa Shóisialaigh na hÉireann ](/ga/social-welfare/irish-social-
welfare-system/) > How to appeal a social welfare decision

#  How to appeal a social welfare decision

  * Appealing a decision 
  * What can I appeal? 
  * What can I not appeal? 
  * Who investigates my appeal? 
  * How to appeal 
  * What is an oral hearing? 
  * Are there any fees or other charges? 
  * Getting help with your appeal 
  * Contact details 

##  Appealing a decision

If you think you have been wrongly refused a social welfare payment, you can
appeal this decision to the Social Welfare Appeals Office.

You must appeal within 21 days of the date of the decision letter. There is no
fee for making an appeal.

Some social welfare payments are not covered by the appeals process (see ‘What
can I not appeal?’ below).

##  What can I appeal?

You can appeal if you are unhappy about any decision of a social welfare [
deciding officer or designated person
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/beda50-operational-guidelines-decision-
making-and-natural-justice/?referrer=https://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/Decision-
Making-and-Natural-Justice.aspx) on a payment that is covered by the Social
Welfare Appeals Office.

You can get a [ list of social welfare schemes and benefits covered by the
Social Welfare Appeals Office (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/42571/5e0eb903e82c432482943283fd667a16.pdf#page=1) .

The Social Welfare Appeals Office also deals with appeals for some payments
under the [ Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme ](/ga/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) . However,
it does not deal with some elements of the Supplementary Welfare Allowance
Scheme such as the Additional Needs Payment, allowances in kind, or any other
once off payment.

##  What can I not appeal?

Some social welfare payments are not covered by the appeals process. This is
because they are not set out on a statutory basis, for example, [ Fuel
Allowance ](/ga/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/)
or the [ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/ga/social-
welfare/families-and-children/liuntas-eadai-agus-coisbhirt-don-scoilbhliain-
nua/) .

There is no formal appeals process for these payments, but if you are unhappy
with a decision on a payment [ not covered by the Social Welfare Appeals
Process ](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/ce66b1-how-to-appeal-a-decision-about-
your-social-welfare-claim/#list-of-schemes-you-cannot-appeal) , you can ask
for the decision to be reviewed by the section in the Department of Social
Protection that dealt with your application.

Find a [ full list of schemes not included in the appeals process on gov.ie.
](https://www.gov.ie/en/service/ce66b1-how-to-appeal-a-decision-about-your-
social-welfare-claim/#list-of-schemes-you-cannot-appeal)

##  Who investigates my appeal?

The [ Social Welfare Appeals Office (SWAO)
](http://www.socialwelfareappeals.ie/) operates independently of the
Department of Social Protection. It provides an independent, accessible and
fair appeals service in relation to entitlement to social welfare payments.

The Office is headed by a Chief Appeals Officer and has its own Appeals
Officers who make decisions on appeals.

####  **Your appeal may be redirected**

In some cases, the SWAO receives an appeal and decides that the reasons for
the decision were not fully understood by you.

In these cases, the SWAO will refer your appeal to the relevant scheme area of
the Department of Social Protection and ask for the decision to be clarified
to you. You are informed of this.

If you are still not happy with the decision following the Department’s
clarification, you can appeal the decision to the SWAO.

####  **Priority**

In general, appeals are dealt with in the order in which they have been
received. However, Supplementary Welfare Allowance appeals (including [ Rent
Supplement ](/ga/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) ) are prioritised.

The Appeals Officer may decide your appeal based on written evidence. This is
called deciding the appeal _summarily_ .

##  How to appeal

####  **Time limit**

You must appeal using the [ Notice of Appeal form (SWA01) pdf
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/266425/135d508b-4c91-48ec-9852-36c5d024560f.pdf#page=null)
within 21 days of the date of the letter notifying you of the Deciding Officer
or Designated Person’s decision.

In exceptional cases, appeals received outside 21 days may be accepted. If you
are making your appeal outside of the time limit, you must explain why.

####  **What to include**

In your appeal you must:

  * Say why you think the decision was not correct 
  * Include copies of any evidence and documents you want to be considered (you should keep your original documents) 
  * Enclose a copy of the letter you got from the Deciding Officer or Designated Person that informed you of the decision 

The Deciding Officer must always give you the reasons for the decision in
writing and the letter should be easy to understand.

You can request an oral hearing at this stage (see ‘What is an oral hearing?’
below).

####  How to submit your appeal

The quickest way to make an appeal is to [ appeal online with MyWelfare
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/appeals/make-an-appeal/) , if you
have a verified [ MyGovID account. ](https://www.mygovid.ie/)

Or, you can download and fill out the [ Appeals Form (pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/266425/135d508b-4c91-48ec-9852-36c5d024560f.pdf%22%20\\l%20%22page=null)
and post or email your appeal including any relevant documents (for example,
your decision letter) to the [ Social Welfare Appeals Office
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/dd7b8-contact-the-social-welfare-appeals-
office/) .

You can also get a paper form from [ your Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office ](https://www.gov.ie/en/directory/category/e1f4b5-intreo-
offices/) .

####  **When the SWAO receives your appeal**

The Social Welfare Appeals Office (SWAO) will:

  * Let you know that they got your appeal. You will be notified on your MyWelfare account if you submitted your appeal online, otherwise you will be notified by post. 
  * Let the Department of Social Protection know of the appeal. The Department must then send any relevant documents to the SWAO. 

When the Department receives notice of an appeal, it reviews the original
decision to decide whether it should be revised in your favour.

####  **A decision is made**

In some cases, new evidence is reviewed by a social welfare inspector, or by a
medical assessor if the appeal is about a sickness or disability-related
payment.

If the decision is changed by the Department at this stage, you will be told.
The Department can only change the decision at this stage if the change is in
your favour.

If the decision is not changed by the Department, your case will be examined
by an Appeals Officer.

The Appeals Officer may decide your appeal based on written evidence. This is
called deciding the appeal _summarily_ .

Generally, the decision of an Appeals Officer is final. However, an Appeals
Officer may revise their decision if new evidence, new facts or any relevant
change of circumstances come to light after a decision is made.

###  If you don't agree with the Appeals Officer's decision

If you think there was a mistake made in relation to the law or the facts of
the case, you can appeal to the Chief Appeals Officer. You will need to send
them a written request for a revised decision and include the new evidence.

You should state the grounds on which you are seeking a revised decision and
why you believe a mistake has been made regarding the law or the facts.

####  **Appeal to higher authorities**

If you disagree with the final decision of the Social Welfare Appeals Office,
you can request the [ Office of the Ombudsman ](/ga/government-in-ireland/how-
government-works/standards-and-accountability/office-of-the-ombudsman/) to
examine your case.

The Ombudsman can:

  * Examine complaints about the actions of the SWAO 
  * Investigate complaints about the everyday administrative activities of the SWAO. 

You may appeal to the [ High Court ](/ga/justice/courts-system/high-court/) on
a point of law or seek a judicial review in the High Court if you think that
the appeal was not fairly conducted. You should get legal advice in this
situation.

###  **If you are involved in an industrial dispute**

If you are refused [ Jobseeker's Benefit ](/ga/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) or [ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/ga/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-allowance/) because of an industrial
dispute at your place of employment, you can contact The Social Welfare
Tribunal.

[ The Social Welfare Tribunal ](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation-
information/72c24-how-the-social-welfare-tribunal-works/) provides a second
level of appeal after an appeal to the Social Welfare Appeals Office. However,
you can also appeal directly to the Tribunal without first going through the
Social Welfare Appeals Office.

##  What is an oral hearing?

Your appeal may be heard at an oral hearing. This can be arranged either
because you have requested one or because the Appeals Officer decided that
this is appropriate for your appeal. Hearings are held in private.

You will be invited to attend this hearing. It is informal and you can bring a
representative to the hearing with you for support or assistance.

A representative may include:

  * A friend 
  * A colleague 
  * A public representative 
  * A trade union official 

You can also bring legal representation.

If you live in Dublin or the surrounding areas, hearings are held at the
Social Welfare Appeals Office (see address in ‘Contact details’ below).

If you live outside Dublin, hearings are held at a venue as near as possible
to where you live.

##  Are there any fees or other charges?

There is no fee for making an appeal about a social welfare decision to the
Social Welfare Appeals Office.

If you have to travel to attend an oral hearing, the Social Welfare Appeals
Office will compensate you for any reasonable travel expenses. You can also be
compensated for any loss of earnings if you have to take time off work to
attend.

The Social Welfare Appeals Office may make an award to a representative such
as a [ solicitor ](/ga/justice/courtroom/solicitors/) if they accompany you to
the oral hearing.

##  Getting help with your appeal

You can get help with making an appeal from your [ local Citizens Information
Service ](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie/) .

Further information is available on the [ Social Welfare Appeals Office
website ](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/031734-the-social-welfare-appeals-
office/) .

Information and advice is also available from your:

  * Intreo Centre 
  * Social Welfare Branch Office 
  * The Social Welfare Appeals Office 

##  Contact details

###  Oifig Achomhairc an Leasa Shóisialaigh

Teach D'Olier  
Sráid D'Olier  
Baile Átha Cliath 2  
Éire

**Teil:** (01) 673 2800 (If calling from outside Ireland please call +353 1
673 2800)

**Lóghlao:** 0818 747 434 (Note: the rates charged for using 0818 (Lo-call)
numbers may vary)

**Facs:** (01) 671 8391

**Láithreán Gréasáin:** [ https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/031734-the-social-
welfare-appeals-office/?referrer=/socialwelfareappeals/
](https://www.gov.ie/en/campaigns/031734-the-social-welfare-appeals-
office/?referrer=/socialwelfareappeals/)

**R-phost:** [ swappeals@welfare.ie ](mailto:swappeals@welfare.ie)

###  An Binse Leasa Shóisialaigh

An Roinn Coimirce Sóisialaí  
Teach Gandon  
Sráid Amiens  
Baile Átha Cliath 1  
Éire

###  Oifig an Ombudsman

6 Ardán Phort an Iarla  
Baile Átha Cliath 2  
D02 HE97  
Éire

**Teil:** (01) 639 5600

**Láithreán Gréasáin:** [ https://www.ombudsman.ie/
](https://www.ombudsman.ie/)

_**Dáta an Leasaithe Deireanaigh:** 17 Meán Fómhair 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
appeals/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=How%20to%20appeal%20a%20social%20welfare%20decision&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
appeals/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
appeals/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=How%20to%20appeal%20a%20social%20welfare%20decision&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/ga/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-welfare-
appeals/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))

###  Ábhar Gaolmhar

  * [ _Seicliosta nuair atá achomharc á dhéanamh in aghaidh chinnidh leasa shóisialaigh_ ](/ga/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/checklist-when-appealing-a-social-welfare-decision/)

Cur síos na céimeanna a bhaineann le hachomharc. Míniú na rudaí á dhéanamh ar
feadh gach céim an achomhairc.

  * [ _Samplaí den chaoi a ngearrtar cáin ar íocaíochtaí leasa shóisialaigh_ ](/ga/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/examples-of-how-social-welfare-payments-are-taxed/)

Féach samplaí den chaoi a ngearrtar cáin ar íocaíochtaí leasa shóisialaigh,
mar Shochar Máithreachais, Sochar Cuardaitheora Poist, agus Sochar
Breoiteachta.

  * [ _Conas a íoctar íocaíochtaí leasa shóisialaigh_ ](/ga/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/how-social-welfare-payments-are-paid/)

Treoir ar athsholáthair leabhar íocaíochta leasa shóisialaigh nó Cárta
Seirbhísí Sóisialacha a cailleadh nó goideadh.

###  Téigh i dteagmháil linn

Má tá ceist agat a bhaineann leis an ábhar seo, is féidir leat glao a chur ar
an tSeirbhís Ghutháin um Fhaisnéis do Shaoránaigh [ _0818 07 4000_
](tel:0818074000) (Luan go hAoine idir 9rn agus 8in).

D'fhéadfá freisin bualadh isteach san [ _Ionad Faisnéise do Shaoránaigh_
](http://centres.citizensinformation.ie) .

