###  If you were divorced abroad

Not all foreign divorces are recognised under Irish law. Under the [ Domicile
and Recognition of Foreign Divorces Act 1986
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1986/act/24/enacted/en/html) , a foreign
divorce from a non-EU state will only be recognised in Ireland if at least one
spouse was _domiciled_ in the state that granted the divorce when the
proceedings started. You may have to provide good evidence that this was the
case and, therefore, that the divorce is valid under Irish law.

Foreign divorces made in other EU states are recognised under [ EU Regulation
2201/2003 (“the Brussels II bis”). ](http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1422886426094&uri=URISERV:l33194) It is the spouse’s
_habitual residence_ that determines a court’s right to grant a divorce. In
this case, your habitual residence is the country in which you have lawfully
established your day to day life.

UK divorces continue to be recognised in Ireland under Part 19 of the
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union (Consequential
Provisions) Act 2020. Again, a habitual residence test applies in respect to
divorces on or after 1 January 2021.

If the divorce comes within EU regulations, it is sufficient to confirm that
both parties to the divorce were notified of the proceedings and had an
opportunity to give evidence to the court which granted the divorce.

If EU regulations do not apply, you must give certain information (such as
place of birth, countries of residence and other relevant facts) on a
questionnaire provided by the Registrar. The information is then forwarded to
the [ General Register Office ](http://www.welfare.ie/en/Pages/General-
Register-Office.aspx) , whose consent is required before the marriage ceremony
can take place.

If the General Registrar thinks the foreign divorce is valid, then the new
marriage can go ahead. If not, you can give additional information to prove
validity, or you can apply for a hearing before the Circuit Court. The court's
decision on the validity of a foreign divorce in Irish law is binding on the
parties unless it is overturned on appeal. If the court decides your foreign
divorce is not binding, your only option if you wish to remarry in Ireland may
be to get a divorce under Irish law.
