###  Committal process

You can only be committed to prison with a valid committal order from a court,
which the Garda or prison officer must give to the relevant prison Governor.

In most cases, upon being committed to prison, you will be brought the
reception area where your name, address, date of birth, nearest relative,
occupation, religion and other details will be recorded. If you have been
convicted of a crime, your photograph, fingerprints and palm prints will be
taken and sent to the Gardaí.

You will be searched by a prison officer of your own gender. Your decency,
privacy and dignity should be respected during the search. If you refuse to be
searched, the prison officer may only use such force as is reasonably
necessary to carry out the search.

A list of all your personal property will be made when you enter prison. Any
banned items, such as prohibited substances or weapons, will be confiscated,
while valuable items, such as jewellery or mobile phones, will be noted and
stored safely in the General Office for return upon your release.

Any money taken from you will be lodged in an account in the General Office.
Friends and family members [ can put money into this account
](https://www.irishprisons.ie/lodging-money-prisoner-account/) for you and
they will be given a receipt. If you do not spend all your money in prison you
will get it back when you are released.

You will be weighed and measured. Details of any marks or scars on your body
should be put in your personal prison file. You will be asked to disclose any
history of substance abuse or mental illness in order that appropriate
supports can be arranged. If you believe it is not safe for you to be among
other prisoners or, if you wish to be placed on protection, you should tell
the prison staff.

The Garda or prison officer who brought you to prison must give the Governor
any medication or prescriptions belonging to you and pass on any information
they have about your health. If possible, you should be examined by a doctor
on the day of your committal, or as soon as possible thereafter.

The prison Governor, or somebody who represents them, should meet with you
within 24 hours of your committal to prison. You should be provided with a
booklet explaining the prison’s rules, your rights and entitlements as a
prisoner, and your responsibilities to prison staff and other inmates. If you
are a foreign national, you should, if possible, be given a copy of the prison
booklet in a language you can understand.

You will be allowed to tell a family member or some other person where you are
as soon as possible.

The Irish Council for Civil Liberties and the Irish Penal Reform Trust [ have
published detailed guidance (PDF) ](https://www.iccl.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/ICCL_Prisoners_rights_BW_2012.pdf) on your rights as a
prisoner, including information on what you can expect upon being committed to
prison.
