##  How will I get around?

There are many ways of [ getting around when you return to Ireland
](/en/returning-to-ireland/getting-around-in-ireland/getting-around-when-you-
return-to-ireland/) , including public transport, driving, cycling, taxis and
more.

**Driving**

You can exchange a driving licence issued by an EU/EEA member state, the UK or
other certain [ recognised states ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring-1/driver-licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-
permit#l7aa43) for an Irish driving licence.

If your driving licence was issued by a country that is [ not recognised for
driving licence exchange ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driver-
licensing/exchanging-foreign-driving-permit/) , you cannot exchange your
licence for an Irish licence. You will need to go through the full driver
licensing procedure.

If you want to bring your car to Ireland you need to know about [ importing a
car ](/en/moving-country/moving-to-ireland/coming-to-live-in-
ireland/importing-car-into-ireland/) and implications for Vehicle Registration
Tax (VRT).

**Free Travel Pass**

If you are aged over 66 and living permanently in Ireland, you are entitled to
free travel on public bus and rail transport under the [ Free Travel Scheme
](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel/) . Some people
under age 66 also qualify.

Public transport services vary across the country, so the services available
to you will depend on where you live. If you are aged 66 or over and have free
travel, you can also travel free of charge on all bus and rail services in
Northern Ireland using a [ Senior Smartpass card ](/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/free-travel#l2ad8a) .

You can also read information about [ travelling on public transport with a
disability or reduced mobility ](/en/travel-and-recreation/public-
transport/travelling-publictransport-with-disability/) .
