##  Where will I live?

If you plan to return to Ireland to retire, you will need to [ find somewhere
to live
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/returning_to_ireland/finding_somewhere_to_live/)
.

**Buying a home**

Depending on your financial situation, you may be able to buy a home. If you
are buying a home, there are housing schemes and grants available, including
the [ Housing aid for older people scheme ](/en/housing/housing-grants-and-
schemes/housing-supports-for-older-people-and-people-with-
disabilities/housing-aid-for-older-people-grant/) to improve the condition of
your home. Read more about the [ steps involved in buying a home
](/en/housing/owning-a-home/buying-a-home/steps-involved-buying-a-home/) .

**Renting a home**

If buying is not an option, you may consider [ renting a home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting_a_home/) . Read more
about the things that you might want to consider when [ looking for private
rented accommodation ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/looking-for-a-flat-or-house-
to-rent/) .

**Social housing**

If you return home to Ireland and have difficulty paying rent or buying
suitable accommodation, you can apply for [ social housing
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/applying-for-local-authority-
housing/) support from your local authority.

Your application for social housing will be assessed on your residency status,
eligibility, need and income. You will also need to show a [ local connection
](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/guide-to-housing-
supports-for-returning-irish-emigrants#l80745) to the area you apply in
(though a housing authority may agree to waive this requirement). If your
application is successful, you will be put on a social housing waiting list.
Once on this list, you can look for a place to rent and get the [ Housing
Assistance Payment (HAP) ](/en/housing/renting-a-home/help-with-
renting/housing-assistance-payment/) to help you pay your rent.

You will need to have somewhere to live while your application is being
assessed, even if it is with friends or family. If you become homeless, you
should contact your [ local authority
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/942f74-local-authorities/) to access
emergency accommodation. Dublin and Cork also have specialist homeless
services. Read about [ housing and other supports for homeless people
](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/)
.

**Safe Home Ireland and housing for older Irish emigrants**

If you are an older, Irish-born emigrant living abroad, and you want to return
to Ireland, but will be unable to provide accommodation for yourself, [ Safe
Home Ireland ](https://safehomeireland.com/) may be able to help you find
accommodation before you return. Find out more about the [ housing assistance
that Safe Home Ireland provides ](https://safehomeireland.com/housing-
assistance/) .

**More information and emergency accommodation**

For more information, see our [ guide to housing supports for returning Irish
emigrants ](/en/returning-to-ireland/finding-somewhere-to-live/guide-to-
housing-supports-for-returning-irish-emigrants/) page, which includes
information on emergency accommodation and how to access this [ support for
people who are homeless ](/en/housing/losing-your-home-and-
homelessness/supports-for-homeless-people/) .
