##  Will I have to pay tax?

If you are moving to Ireland you need to know about [ residency for tax
purposes ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/moving-country-and-taxation/tax-residence-
and-domicile-in-ireland/) . Your residence for tax purposes depends on the
number of days that you are present in Ireland during a tax year (a tax year
runs from 1 January to 31 December).

**Tax on your belongings**

If youâ€™re returning to Ireland for an extended period of time, you may need to
[ ship your belongings home ](/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-your-journey-
home/shipping-your-belongings-back-to-ireland/) and you may need to pay
certain import taxes on your items. However, there are tax reliefs available.
Read about the [ taxes you may have to pay when shipping your belongings back
to Ireland ](/en/returning-to-ireland/planning-your-journey-home/shipping-
your-belongings-back-to-ireland#l683b4) .

**Pensions and tax relief**

In general, foreign pensions (including UK and US pensions) are also taxable
sources of income in Ireland. They are liable to Income Tax (IT) and Universal
Social Charge (USC), but not Pay Related Social Insurance (PRSI).

There are some special tax arrangements for people aged 65 or over and [ tax
relief is available ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/taxation-and-medical-expenses/) for certain medical expenses including
nursing home costs.

You can find out about [ income tax credits and reliefs
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money_and_tax/tax/income_tax_credits_and_reliefs/)
and how pensions are taxed.

**Tax on your savings**

If you have savings from employment income earned when you were not tax
resident in Ireland, those savings will not be taxable when brought home.

If you are tax resident in Ireland, you are charged a tax on the interest you
are paid from certain deposit accounts (such as deposit accounts in certain
banks or building societies). This is called [ Deposit Interest Retention Tax
(DIRT) ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/tax-on-savings-and-investments/deposit-
interest-retention-tax/) . This happens whether or not you would normally be
liable for tax. If you are aged 65 or over or your spouse or civil partner is
aged 65 or over, or if you are permanently incapacitated, you may not be
liable for DIRT if you are exempt from income tax.

**Tax for people aged 65 and over**

If you are aged 65 or over, you must pay income tax in the normal way.
However, there are tax exemption limits and some extra tax credits available
to people aged 65 or over. For more information, see [ older people's tax
credits and reliefs ](/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax-credits-and-
reliefs/older-peoples-tax-credits-and-reliefs/) .
