##  Rules

The rules governing social welfare assistance payments are set out in
legislation and/or administrative guidelines. Most of the guidelines are now
available on the [ Department of Social Protection's (DSP) website
](https://www.gov.ie/en/organisation/department-of-employment-affairs-and-
social-protection/) .

In general you cannot get two social assistance payments (except for [ Carer's
Allowance which can be paid at a half rate with another social welfare payment
](/en/social-welfare/carers/half-rate-carers-allowance/) ). If you think you
might qualify for more than one payment, you generally have to choose the one
that is of most benefit to you.

There are a number of social assistance payments. You may qualify for one
depending on your circumstances:

[ Jobseeker's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-
allowance/) is paid to people aged 18 or over and unemployed.

[ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) (OFP) is paid to men and women who are bringing
children up without the support of a partner.

[ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) is an
income support scheme for farmers. You do not need to be available for work to
qualify for Farm Assist.

[ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-Contributory) Pension
](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-persons-non-contrib-
pension/) is paid to widows, widowers and surviving civil partners who do not
have dependent children.

[ Guardian's Payment (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-
benefits/guardian-and-orphan-payments/) is paid to an orphan's guardian up to
the orphan's 18th birthday or 22nd birthday if he or she is in full-time
education.

[ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) is paid to
people who are looking after someone who is in need of full-time care and
attention because of age, physical or learning disability or illness,
including mental illness.

[ Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) is paid to people that have no little or
no income.

[ State Pension (Non-Contributory) ](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-
people/state-pension-non-contributory/) is paid to people when they reach 66
years of age.

[ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-
pension/) is paid to blind and visually impaired people.

[ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/) is paid to people with a disability who are aged 16 or over and
under age 66.

Deserted Wife's Allowance is paid to women who were deserted by their husband
and have no dependent children. This scheme was closed to new applications in
January 1997.

If you qualify for a social assistance payment you may qualify for [
additional social welfare benefits ](/en/social-welfare/extra-social-welfare-
benefits/) .

For most social assistance payments, decisions about your entitlement are made
by Deciding Officers. Deciding Officers are DSP officials appointed under the
social welfare legislation.

If you are not happy with a decision by the Department of Social Protection,
you have a right to appeal decisions in relation to payments that are based in
legislation. Appeals are made to the Social Welfare Appeals Office, an
independent statutory body. [ Find out how to appeal a decision of the
Department of Social Protection ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-welfare-appeals/) .  
