###  **Student Grant Scheme**

If you are **a full-time student** studying an approved course, you can apply
to [ Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) ](https://www.susi.ie/how-to-
apply/index.html) for a student grant. All types of students including mature
students can apply for funding.

To be eligible for a student grant, you must meet certain criteria including:

  * Nationality and residency 
  * Approved course of study and progression 
  * Income 

Your reckonable income, calculated for grant purposes, must fall under
specific thresholds.

Read more on the [ eligibility criteria for a student grant
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#19584a) .

If you are applying for an undergraduate course and you have already completed
an undergraduate course, you are **not** eligible for either a student grant
or free fees. However, in certain circumstances, [ you may be considered
eligible for funding ](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/previous-
education-and-progression/) , for example, if you attended a course previously
but did not complete it.

If you are studying certain **part-time undergraduate courses** , you can
apply to SUSI for the [ part-time fee scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/part-time-fee-scheme-for-undergraduate-
courses/) .

You may be eligible for a grant if you are starting a [ Post-Leaving
Certificate (PLC) ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-
education-and-training/post-leaving-certificate-courses/) course as part of
the [ tertiary education programme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-
education/applying-to-college/tertiary-education-programme/) leading to a
higher-level qualification than your previous undergraduate qualification.

[ Funding is available for postgraduate students
](https://www.susi.ie/eligibility-criteria/income/postgraduate-income-
thresholds-and-grant-award-rates/) under the Student Grant Scheme for
**approved postgraduate courses** in Ireland and Northern Ireland. You cannot
get support under the Scheme for courses elsewhere in the EU. Read more about
[ postgraduate student grants
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/postgraduate-student-grant/) .

[ Student Universal Support Ireland (SUSI) ](https://www.susi.ie/) handles all
applications for student grants. You must [ apply for your grant online
](https://grantsonline.ie/auth/esr.elogin) . Applications for the 2024-2025
academic year are open.
