###  If you change from one social welfare payment to another:

There is no change to your Rent Supplement payment if the amount you get stays
the same.

If you transfer onto a different and higher payment your Rent Supplement will
be reduced in line with the increase (unless you are aged 65 or over or are
getting a carer’s payment – see below). For example, a person getting [
Illness Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/illness-benefit/)
who transfers onto [ Maternity Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/maternity-benefit/) at a higher rate may have their Rent Supplement
reduced by the difference between the two payments.

**If you are aged 65 or over** (or where one of a couple is aged 65 or over)
and have a combined household income greater than the SWA rate for your
circumstances you are allowed a disregard. The disregard is equal to the
difference between the maximum rate of [ State Pension (Contributory)
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-contributory/) for
your circumstances and the [ basic Supplementary Welfare Allowance (SWA)
](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-
allow/) rate for your circumstances.

**A carer's disregard** applies to people getting carer’s payments. So, if you
are getting Carer's Allowance or Carer’s Benefit, the amount of the actual
carer’s payment above the appropriate SWA rate for your situation (either the
SWA qualified adult rate if one of a couple is getting Carer's Allowance or
the personal rate of SWA if the carer is single) is not taken into account.
Half-rate Carer’s Allowance is never taken into account.

To get your carer’s disregard you subtract the relevant rate of SWA from the
actual rate of Carer’s Allowance or Benefit you are getting (not including any
Increases for Qualified Children).
