###  How are rent increases in RPZs calculated?

The system for calculating allowable rent increases in RPZs has changed a
number of times.

Since, 11 December 2021, annual rent increases in RPZs are capped in line with
the rate of general inflation or 2% a year, **whichever is lower** . So, if
your landlord reviews the rent every 12 months and the rate of general
inflation is 1.5%, then your rent can only be increased by a maximum of 1.5%.
However, if the rate of general inflation is higher than 2%, for example, 3%,
the rent can only be increased by a maximum of 2%.

If your landlord has not reviewed the rent for a number of years, the 2% cap
applies every year. So, for example, if you moved into rented accommodation in
December 2016 and the rent hasn’t changed since then, the general inflation
rate would apply when calculating the rent increase. This is because the
inflation rate between December 2016 and December 2021 was 6.6%, which is
lower than the 10% that would apply under the 2% per year condition (2% per
year for 5 years = 10%). The [ RTB’s Rent Pressure Zone calculator
](https://www.rtb.ie/calculator/rpz) applies both of these conditions and
calculates the allowable rent increase for you.

From 16 July 2021 to 10 December 2021, annual rent increases in RPZs were only
capped at the rate of general inflation, as set out in the [ Harmonised
Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) ](https://www.rtb.ie/calculator/hicp-index)
. But, due to rising inflation these rules were changed to include the new 2%
per year condition. This was introduced under the [ Residential Tenancies
(Amendment) (No. 2) Act 2021
](https://www.oireachtas.ie/en/bills/bill/2021/145/) . The RTB has published a
[ guidance document (pdf)
](https://www.rtb.ie/images/uploads/Comms%20and%20Research/Government_Guidance_Residential_Tenancies_\(Amendment\)_Act_2021_V2_13_Dec_21.pdf)
highlighting the changes this legislation brought in and what they mean for
landlords and tenants.

Between 24 December 2016 and 15 July 2021 rent increases in RPZs were capped
at 4% per year.

The RTB has [ general information about RPZs, as well as detail on the
Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) ](https://www.rtb.ie/rent-
pressure-zones) , and how it relates to RPZs.
