##  When you are a cost rental tenant

When you are a cost rental tenant, your landlord will be the organisation who
delivered your home. For example, the AHB or local authority who provided your
cost rental home or an agent operating on their behalf. You will have a
tenancy agreement with the landlord, which will include details about the
length of the tenancy, as well as the rights and responsibilities you have as
a tenant.

With cost rental homes, you get longer security of tenure. You get security of
tenure after the first 6 months as long as there are no issues with breaches
of tenancy or rent arrears. This means if you are paying your rent and meeting
your other tenant obligations, you can continue to rent your home for as long
as you want.

If you are a [ tenant in cost rental housing, you are protected in residential
tenancies legislation
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2021/act/25/section/32/enacted/en/html)
. You have some of the same rights as private tenants. For example, you can
access the RTB’s dispute resolution process and your tenancy must be
registered with the RTB. However, there are some differences, for example, the
rent setting process is different and a cost rental tenancy cannot be
terminated for the same reasons as private tenancies.

Your rent must be at least 25% below private market rents in the area. Rents
are linked to inflation, so any rent increases will be in-line with inflation.
Your cost rental tenancy agreement may include information about how often
your rent will be reviewed. However, if it does not, the general rules say
that rent cannot be reviewed within 12 months of the start of the tenancy and
not more than once every 12 months after that.

You must get notice of a rent review and this notice must [ contain specific
information about the new rent
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2021/act/25/section/33/enacted/en/html)
. If you have a dispute about the new rent, you can bring this to the RTB
within 28 days of getting the rent review notice.

If your circumstances change when you are a cost rental tenant, you can
continue renting the property. For example, if your household income increases
above the income limit after you’ve moved in, you won’t have to move out.
