##  Case progression

Case progression is a case management system where specific issues in a
dispute are identified and efforts are made to either resolve or narrow those
issues prior to trial. The purpose of case progression is to ensure that the
proceedings for trial are prepared in a manner which is fair, efficient and
likely to keep the costs as low as possible.

A direction that the proceedings be subject to case progression may be given
by the County Registrar or the judge where they are satisfied that it would be
appropriate to do so. The plaintiff or the defendant can also issue a motion
for case progression where they wish to engage in the process.

The County Registrar issues a [ summons to attend a case progression hearing
](https://www.courts.ie/content/summons-attend-case-progression-hearing) with
the Registrar, giving not less than 21 days’ notice. Not later than 7 days
before the hearing, the plaintiff must file at the Circuit Court office an
indexed book of pleadings exchanged between the parties and serve a copy of
the index on the defendant.

At the case progression hearing, the County Registrar will establish what
steps remain to be taken to prepare the case for trial and fix a timetable for
the completion of preparation of the case for trial. The Registrar may make
orders or give directions with respect to pleadings and other matters. The
Registrar may on the application of any of the parties or of the Registrar’s
own motion order that the proceedings or any issue therein be adjourned and
invite the parties to use mediation, conciliation, arbitration or other
dispute resolution process to settle or determine the proceedings or issue.

The rules applying to case progression are contained in [ Order 19A of the
Circuit Court Rules ](https://www.courts.ie/rules/case-progression-general-si-
no-539-2009) .
