##  What is evidence?

In [ criminal ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/criminal-trial/) and [
civil ](/en/justice/civil-law/taking-and-appealing-a-civil-case/) cases, the
court can only decide on the issue before it based on the evidence given in
the case. Evidence can be introduced by both sides in a case and is something
that proves or disproves a particular fact - it makes the existence or non-
existence of that fact more likely.

The law of evidence sets out rules about what evidence can be introduced to
prove facts in a trial. An item of evidence is described as "inadmissible" if
the law of evidence does not allow it to be introduced at a trial and
"admissible" if the law of evidence allows it to be introduced to prove or
disprove a particular fact.

In this section, you will find information about different types of evidence
and when those types of evidence are admissible or inadmissible in a case.
There is information on [ real evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/real-evidence/)
, [ documentary evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/documentary-evidence/) , [
hearsay evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/hearsay-evidence/) , [ circumstantial
evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/circumstantial-evidence/) , [ evidence that
has been collected unlawfully ](/en/justice/evidence/unlawfully-obtained-
evidence/) , [ identification evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/identification-
evidence/) and [ DNA evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/dna-evidence/) .

Some evidence may be relevant and it may be admissible but may be [ privileged
evidence ](/en/justice/evidence/privileged-evidence/) so it cannot be
introduced. Other evidence may be admissible but may be [ suspect evidence
](/en/justice/evidence/suspect-evidence/) so that certain safeguards must be
put in place to protect the accused.

There is also information in this section about [ crime scenes
](/en/justice/evidence/crime-scenes/) and how they are preserved and
investigated.

The rules about what can be admitted as evidence in a criminal trial are
complex. The [ Criminal Justice Act 2006
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2006/act/26/enacted/en/print) provides
for the admissibility of statements which were made by witnesses and which the
witness subsequently refuses to stand over. The court can decide whether or
not to admit these statements and the Act sets out guidelines for the court
when making this decision.
