###  The following payments are not paid if you are outside the State but
there are some exceptions depending on your circumstances

Deserted Wife's Benefit can be paid up to a maximum of 3 weeks.

[ Carer's Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/carers/carers-allowance/) can be paid
if you accompany the person you are caring for abroad to get medical
treatment. You can also go abroad on a respite break for a maximum of 3 weeks.

[ Disability Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/disability-
allowance/) can be paid if you are studying an approved course outside the
State under the [ Back to Education Allowance scheme ](/en/social-
welfare/back-to-education/back-to-education-allowance/) or getting medical
treatment not available in Ireland. You must notify the Department and provide
proof of medical treatment or education abroad. Under legislation you have no
entitlement to be paid Disability Allowance while on holiday. However, in
practice Disability Allowance may be paid for 2 weeks while you are on holiday
abroad. You should inform the Department of Social Protection before you go on
holiday.

[ One-Parent Family Payment ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/one-
parent-family-payment/) and [ Jobseeker's Transitional payment ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-transitional-payment/) can be paid up to
a maximum of 3 weeks while you are on holiday abroad. You must notify the
Department in advance that you are going abroad.

If you are getting [ Widow's, Widower's or Surviving Civil Partner's (Non-
Contributory) Pension ](/en/social-welfare/death-related-benefits/widowed-
persons-non-contrib-pension/) , [ State Pension (Non-Contributory)
](/en/social-welfare/older-and-retired-people/state-pension-non-contributory/)
and [ Blind Pension ](/en/social-welfare/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-
pension/) you can go abroad in exceptional circumstances for a limited period
and the Department will review your entitlement when you return. You must
notify the Department before leaving the State. If you are getting State
Pension (Non-Contributory) or Blind Pension and take up residence in Northern
Ireland, the pension is payable until you become entitled to an equivalent
payment from Northern Ireland or for a period of 5 years whichever is the
shorter.

[ Child Benefit ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-children/child-benefit/) can
be paid to volunteer development workers and members of the Irish Defence
Forces or Irish Civil Service serving abroad. It can also be paid if you are
working abroad for an Irish employer and paying Irish social insurance
contributions.
