##  Release on bail by a member of the Garda Síochána

When a child is charged with a criminal offence, the Garda in charge of the
station may direct that the child be brought before the next available sitting
of the [ Children Court
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/courts-system/children-court/)
. This could involve the child staying in the custody of the Gardaí until the
following morning.

Alternatively, the Garda in charge may release the child from custody on [
bail ](/en/justice/arrests/bail-and-surety/) to appear at a sitting of the
Children Court within 30 days. This is done by requiring the child to enter
into a _recognisance_ with or without _sureties_ to appear in court at a
future date.

**What does “entering into a recognisance” mean?**

A recognisance is a pledge or promise made and signed by the child, or by the
child and the parents or guardian, that the child and possibly the parent or
guardian will appear in court on the date requested.

The recognisance might be made with a surety attached. A surety is a promise
to pay a sum of money to ensure that the child appears in court in addition to
making the promise to appear in court. If the child fails to appear, then the
sum of money is lost and must be paid over to the State.

While a surety is a promise of money, the Garda in charge may accept a deposit
of money in cash from the parents or guardian to ensure that the child appears
in court. This money is returned when the child’s case is finally dealt with
or the judge decides to reduce or change the terms of the bail.

You can get more information on the [ consequences of breaching bail terms
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/arrests/bail-and-surety/) .

_**Page edited:** 23 May 2024 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/treatment-of-child-suspects-in-garda-
custody/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Treatment%20of%20child%20suspects%20in%20Garda%20custody&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/treatment-of-child-suspects-in-garda-
custody/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/treatment-of-child-suspects-in-garda-
custody/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Treatment%20of%20child%20suspects%20in%20Garda%20custody&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/children-
and-young-offenders/treatment-of-child-suspects-in-garda-
custody/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
