##  Introduction

It can be an overwhelming experience for a parent when your child is
experiencing difficulties with their mental health. Sometimes, mental health
issues can be eased by getting support from family or friends. Other times,
mental health issues can be more complex and difficult to deal with.

You can access a range of free supports and resources to help you manage
‘mild’ mental health challenges and protect you child's mental health and
wellbeing. These include websites like [ spunout.ie
](https://spunout.ie/category/mental-health) and [ yourmentalhealth.ie
](https://www2.hse.ie/mental-health/) . You can also contact helplines and
advocacy services that are funded and supported by the HSE. For example, [
50808 ](https://spunout.ie/news/news-2/text-message-support-service-ctl) , [
Childline ](https://www.childline.ie/) , and [ Samaritans
](https://www.samaritans.org/?currency=EUR&nation=ireland) .

The Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth has
published a directory of the different [ services and supports available for
parents, children and young people ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e0bdb-
keeping-you-and-your-child-safe/) . You can also find information on [
helplines for parents and parenting courses
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/9116d-helplines-parenting-courses-and-
advice/) .

If you need more support, there are mental health services specifically for
children. The service or organisation you go to depends on what your child is
going through, and whether it is considered 'mild', or more 'severe'. Even
when a mental health difficulty is categorised as ‘mild’, that does not mean
it is not serious or important. All mental health difficulties can be
distressing and have a significant impact.

Knowing what mental health services there are and how to access them isn’t
always easy. Here we describe the main services and how they can help.

  * Your family doctor 
  * Primary care services 
  * Specialist services 
  * Private mental health care services 
  * Non-profit organisations 
