###  Additional documentation

The additional documentation you need to send depends on how your child
obtained their Irish citizenship. Original documents cannot be returned while
the application is being processed. Any documents submitted will be returned
within 20 working days of the passport issue. You should not book any travel
until you have all travel documents. You can get details from the [ DFA
website ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/passports/documentary-requirements/) .

**My child was born in Ireland before 1 January 2005**

Your child is an Irish citizen by birth. You only need to show that the child
was born in Ireland to prove citizenship. You should send your child's birth
certificate.

**I am an EU/EEA/Swiss citizen, and my child was born in Ireland after 1
January 2005.**

You will have to show that **either parent** has lived in Ireland for 3 out of
the 4 years before your child was born. You should send:

  * [ Declaration Form A (pdf) ](https://www.ireland.ie/544/Declaration-Form-A.pdf) if you are the parent of the child 
  * [ Declaration Form B (pdf) ](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2005/en/si/0001.html) if you are acting in loco parentis (because the parents are unable to make the declaration) 

To prove your residency, **either parent** can send:

  * Tax records, including P60, P45 and P35L certificates 
  * Records of any social welfare benefits or a statement from the Department of Social Protection confirming that the parent received benefits and giving exact dates 
  * Other documents to fill any gaps in periods of residency, such as, pay slips, utility bills, an official rent/lease agreement, a rent book or bank statements showing local transactions 

**I am an Irish citizen and my child was born in Ireland after 1 January
2005.**

You should include:

  * Your child’s civil birth certificate 
  * Your original Irish birth certificate or a photocopy of your passport (Proof of parent’s citizenship). [ Do not send your original Irish passport ](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/passports/documentary-requirements/child/) . 

You must have been an Irish citizen at the time of the child’s birth. For
example, if you are an Irish citizen by naturalisation, you must have been
naturalised before your child’s birth.

**I am a citizen of a country outside the EEA/Switzerland and my child was
born in Ireland.**

You will have to show that you (or the child's other parent) have lived
legally in Ireland for 3 out of the 4 years before your child was born. Time
spent waiting for an International Protection decision or living in Ireland on
a student visa does not count towards the residence requirements. You should
send the following documents for either parent of the child:

  * **Original** passport with permission stamps to reside in Ireland and/or your Irish Residence Permit Card (IRP) 
  * Letters from the Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS) granting you permission to remain in the State. Not every residence permission is granted by letter, so this will depend on the type of residency you have in Ireland. 
  * A written summary statement. The summary should be signed, and include: 

  1. Your passport number 
  2. Name of passport holder 
  3. Description of the stamp(s) (for example, Stamp 4) 
  4. Dates of the permission 

**I** **have refugee status and my child was born in Ireland.**

  * Your original travel document 
  * The letter from the Department of Justice confirming that you have been granted refugee status 
  * Your Irish Residence Permit Card 

**I have indefinite leave to remain in the UK and lived in Northern Ireland
for at least three years before the birth of my child**

You must apply for a certificate of nationality from the [ Immigration Service
Delivery ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/citizenship/) . To apply, complete
[ Declaration Form C ](https://www.irishimmigration.ie/how-to-become-a-
citizen/declaration-of-residence/) (or ( [ Declaration Form D
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2005/en/si/0001.html) if you are acting _in
loco parentis_ )

**I am an Irish citizen by birth and my child was born abroad.**

  * Your child is an Irish citizen by birth because you (or the child’s other parent) was born on the island of Ireland. The child is Irish regardless of where they were born. You should send: 
  * Your child's full birth certificate, 
  * Your full birth certificate 
  * Your marriage certificate (if applicable) 

**I am an Irish citizen, but I was not born in Ireland. My child was born
abroad.**

You must register the child’s birth on the [ Foreign Births Register
](https://www.ireland.ie/en/dfa/citizenship/) before you can apply for an
Irish passport for your child. Once this has been completed you should send:

  * The child's certificate of entry in the Foreign Births Register, which was issued by the Department of Foreign Affairs 
  * The child's birth certificate 

**I am an Irish citizen by naturalisation, and my child was born abroad**

You must register the child’s birth on the Foreign Births Register before you
can apply for an Irish passport for your child. Once this has been completed
you should send:

  * The child's certificate of entry in the Foreign Births Register, which was issued by the Department of Foreign Affairs 
  * The child's birth certificate. 

If you are an Irish citizen and your child was born abroad and adopted under
Irish law, the certificate of entry in the Irish Adoption Authority's Register
of Intercountry Adoptions as well as your passport or birth certificate is
required. (If you are living abroad and adopted your child abroad, you should
apply for the adoption to be entered in the Register of Intercountry
Adoptions.)

**I am an Irish citizen and I adopted my child abroad**

You should include:

  * Your certificate of entry in the [ Register of Intercountry Adoptions ](https://aai.gov.ie/en/who-we-are/inter-country/rica.html)
  * Your birth certificate or Irish passport 
  * Your child’s adoption certificate 
