##  What do I need to do for the Organic Farming Scheme?

**1\. Research organic farming**

You should research the type of organic farming you hope to do and find out if
it is suitable for you and your farm. If you will be organic farming for the
first time, it might mean significant changes to the way you currently farm.

Gov.ie has useful information about [ organic farming
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/fc7c8-organic-farming/) , including how to
convert to organic production methods.

If you are not already certified as organic, the first 2 years of the scheme
count as a conversion period and you get higher payments during this time.

**2\. Register with an Organic Certification Body**

You should register with an [ Organic Certification Body (OCB)
](https://www.teagasc.ie/rural-economy/organics/steps-to-organic-
conversion/organic-certification-bodies/) . This involves:

  * Applying to an OCB 
  * Completing a conversion plan 
  * Having an inspection 

Once you are certified as organic, you will have yearly inspections from the
OCB.

There are 2 organic certification bodies in Ireland:

  * [ Irish Organic Association ](https://www.irishorganicassociation.ie/)
  * [ Organic Trust ](https://organictrust.ie/)

**3\. Complete an approved training course**

You will have to complete an approved training course. This is a 25-hour, QQI
Level 5 course on organic farming principles. This course is available from
the [ National Organic Training (NOTS) ](https://nots.ie/) or [ Teagasc
](https://teagasc.clr.events/event/135453:teagasc-organic-courses-zoom-april-
may-2024) .

You can apply for the scheme before you complete the approved course. But, you
will have to upload your completion certificate on the online OFS application
system by 1 October 2024. Otherwise, you will not qualify for payment.

If you apply as part of a joint application of a Farm Partnership, only one
person needs to complete the course.

**4\. Apply for the Organic Farming Scheme**

You apply to the Organic Farming Scheme with your [ Basic Income Support for
Sustainability Scheme (BISS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/basic-income-support-
for-sustainability-scheme-for-farmers/) application.

You can access this on agfood.ie.

See ‘ [ How do I apply for the Organic Farming Scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/land/organic-farming-
scheme/#4b277e) ’ below.

**5\. Become organic**

Once you have been accepted onto the scheme, you can only buy organic or in-
conversion stock for land which you are farming organically.

If you already own animals, these cannot become organic. However, once you
have progressed through the in-conversion phase, the offspring of these
animals will be organic.

Your farm will only reach organic status after the 2-year conversion period.
This period can be extended if you do not comply with organic standards. This
is monitored by the OCB. After the conversion period, you can advertise and
sell products as organic.

You can find organic livestock, seeds, fodder and other organic produce on the
[ Organic Trading Hub ](https://organictradinghub.ie/) .
