##  Where can I get help if my home is being repossessed?

**Your lender**

If you are having difficulty paying your mortgage, you should talk to your
lender as soon as possible. There are [ codes of conduct for mortgage lenders
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning_a_home/mortgage_arrears/consumer_protection_codes_and_mortgages.en.html)
, which outline the steps your lender must take to deal with any problems you
have paying your mortgage. Repossessing your home should be the last option
for your lender.

**The Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS)**

The [ Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money_and_tax/personal_finance/debt/mabs_service.en.html)
offer advice and support to people facing repossession.

MABS has a Dedicated Mortgage Arrears service and a court mentor service. They
run the [ Abhaile scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning_a_home/mortgage_arrears/aid_and_advice_scheme.en.html)
which provides services for people who are in serious mortgage arrears and at
risk of losing their home. These services include financial advice, legal
advice and insolvency advice.

MABS can also help you to prepare if you have to go to court. They may tell
you the type of questions you can expect from the judge and the documentation
you need for your case (for example, a statement of income and expenditure).

**Legal advice**

If you need legal advice and representation, you may be able to get [ civil
legal aid
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/legal_aid_and_advice/civil_legal_advice_and_legal_aid.en.html)
, depending on your circumstances. The [ Abhaile scheme
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning_a_home/mortgage_arrears/aid_and_advice_scheme.en.html)
also covers a certain amount of free legal aid and advice for eligible
borrowers.

You can also contact a [ Free Legal Advice Centre (FLAC)
](http://www.flac.ie/) to get advice on legal papers or legal issues.

[ New Beginning ](http://www.newbeginning.ie/) is a not-for-profit
organisation which aims to represent people in debt.

**Help finding somewhere to live**

If your home is being repossessed, you will need to find somewhere else to
live. If you meet the criteria, you can [ apply to the local authority
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local_authority_and_social_housing/applying_for_local_authority_housing.html)
to be housed.

If you rent from a private landlord, you may qualify for [ Rent Supplement
](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-supplement/) or the [
Housing Assistance Payment (HAP)
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/renting_a_home/housing_assistance_payment.en.html)
to help with the rent.

If you cannot find anywhere to live, our page on [ housing and other supports
for homeless people
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/losing_your_home/housing_options_for_homeless_people.html)
may be useful.
