##  Medical services

The prison healthcare service provides prisoners with access to the same range
of healthcare services as are available under [ the Medical Card scheme
](/en/health/medical-cards-and-gp-visit-cards/medical-card/) in the community.

A range of services are provided to prisoners, including:

[ **Primary Care** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-services/prison-
healthcare-service/primary-care/)

Each prison has a minimum of one prison doctor who attends the prison Monday
to Friday and also provides an out of hours on call service. Nurses provide 24
hour cover in all closed prisons. The doctor and nurses are the first point of
contact for prisoners seeking medical treatment and provide services similar
to those available in a GP practice in the community. Prisoners can request to
see the doctor or nurses at any time.

[ **Pharmacy Service** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-services/prison-
healthcare-service/pharmacy-service/)

General pharmacy services are provided in all prisons on the basis of a
contract with a local community pharmacy. Some prisoners, following a risk
assessment, may be deemed eligible for In-possession (I/P) pharmacy services.
Under this system, prisoners are provided a week’s supply of their dispensed
medication and assume full responsibility for the storage, management and
self-administration of the medicine. This I/P scheme is intended to support
prisoners in preparing for their release and re-integration into society.

[ **Mental Health Services** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-
services/prison-healthcare-service/mental-health-services/)

All prisoners are medically assessed on committal to prison. This includes a
mental health assessment which can be used to develop an individual care plan.
You may also be referred to a forensic psychiatrist who may make certain
recommendations to the Governor for the care of the prisoner.

[ **Drug Treatment Services** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-
services/drug-treatment-services/)

The Irish Prison Service operates a range of medical and rehabilitative
services for prisoners with substance abuse issues, including methadone
substation treatment, psychosocial services, and ‘work and training’
programmes.

[ **Dental Services** ](https://www.irishprisons.ie/prisoner-services/prison-
healthcare-service/dental-services/)

The dental services provided to prisoners are the same as those available
under the Medical Card scheme and include treatments such as a dental
examination, 2 fillings in each calendar year and extractions as necessary.
You can ask to be placed on the list for the dentist and, in some instances,
the prison doctor or nurse may refer you.
