###  What information will I have to provide?

The online application form is slightly different to the paper application
form, which is divided into 5 sections, but you need to provide the same
information on both.

  * **Section 1**   
This section is for the contact details of the person completing the form. You
have to indicate what capacity you are completing the form in, for example,
for yourself, or as a support person.

  * **Section 2**   
This section requires the details of the person who spent time in one (or
more) of the [ Institutions covered by the Scheme
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/a65d8-institutions-covered-by-the-payment-
scheme/) . You need to know the name of the institution and, if you can, the
estimated arrival and departure dates. If you do not know the name of the
institution, you can use the [ Birth Information and Tracing Service
](https://www.birthinfo.ie/) .

  * **Section 3**   
In Section 3, you have to say what benefits you are applying for. You can
apply for just one benefit, for two, or for all three, subject to the amount
of time spent in the institution or institutions.  
  
You also need to confirm if you, or the person you are applying for:  
\- Ever received a court settlement for the same time period in the
institution or  
institutions that is being applied for  
\- Currently has a medical card under the Magdalen Restorative Justice Ex-
Gratia  
Scheme

  * **Section 4  
** Section 4 has checklists of the supporting documentation that must be
provided with the application. This depends on who is making the application,
for example, if you are applying on your own behalf, or if you are applying on
behalf of a person who is deceased. You do not need to include any records
showing time spent in an institution.  
  
Everyone applying to the scheme must provide certified photo ID (passport,
driving licence or Public Services Card/National Security Card).  
  
At this stage in the process, you can also indicate if you need your
application to be prioritised because you are terminally ill. The Payment
Scheme Office will require a short letter from your medical practitioner to
confirm this.  
  
**I am a personal representative applying on behalf of someone who is deceased  
** If you are applying on behalf of someone who is deceased, you need to
include a copy of the death certificate and an additional proof of your right
to act on behalf of the deceasedâ€™s estate, such as a certified Letter of
Administration or Grant of Probate. Further details of the documentation
needed if you are making an application on behalf of someone who is deceased
is available at [ gov.ie ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/bed53-mother-and-
baby-institutions-payment-scheme-your-questions-answered/#can-i-apply-to-the-
mother-and-baby-institutions-payment-scheme-on-behalf-of-someone-who-has-died)
.  

  * **Section 5**   
This section contains the declaration and signature.
