###  Maintaining your social insurance

It is important that you maintain, as far as possible, your social insurance
record. If you leave the workforce, it is important that you keep your social
insurance record active. To protect your social insurance record and keep it
active, you should contact the Department of Social Protection to check if you
can get [ credited contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/social-insurance-prsi/credited-social-insurance-contributions/) . It
may be possible in certain circumstances for you to make [ voluntary
contributions ](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/80e5ab-prsi-pay-related-
social-insurance/#voluntary-contributions) . You can also [ add Irish
contributions and contributions paid in certain other states while working
abroad together to qualify for a social insurance payment ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/social-
insurance-contributions-from-abroad/) .

If you are a part-time worker or in a job-sharing work arrangement you should
be aware of how your pattern of work can affect your social insurance record.
This is particularly relevant if you are part-time or job-sharing with a week
off as part of your work pattern because you may miss out paying a PRSI
contribution for the week you are not working. [ Find out more about part-time
and job-share workers and social insurance contributions ](/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/part-time-work-and-
social-insurance-prsi/) .

All records of your insurance contributions are kept and managed by the PRSI
Records section in the Department of Social Protection. The Department is
responsible for the payments made as a result of your social insurance
contributions.

You can also request a copy of your complete [ PRSI record online at
MyWelfare.ie ](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/statements-refunds-and-
calculators/) . If you have difficulty using this online facility, you can
contact the PRSI Records customer service team for assistance (see 'Where to
apply')
