##  Register of charitable organisations

The Charities Regulator maintains a register of charities that are active in
Ireland. It is an offence for a charitable organisation to carry out
activities if it is not registered with the Charities Regulator.

Being registered with the Charities Regulator is separate from being granted a
charitable tax exemption. A charity must be registered with the Charities
Regulator before they can apply for a charitable tax exemption. The Revenue
Commissioners decide if an organisation is a charity for tax purposes and
whether it qualifies for a tax exemption. There is [ a list of charitable
bodies on the Charities Regulator website
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-the-public/search-the-
register-of-charities) .

**What the Regulator needs to register a charity**

Organisations that want to carry out charitable activities must register with
the Regulator. They must provide information about their organisation
including where it operates, what it does and who the trustees are. They must
also provide information about the organisation’s income and fundraising
activities, including:

  * Bank account details 
  * How they fundraise 
  * Details of any property they are using 
  * A business plan, including: 
    * A short history of the organisation 
    * A description of who will donate and who will benefit 
    * A summary of the operational plan 
    * Detailed financial projections 
    * A summary of the risks they have identified 

Each organisation must provide a copy of its constitution or governing
documents. Organisations who work with vulnerable people and children must
also give details of the risk assessment procedures, safety checks and
safeguards they have in place.

**Approved applications**

If the Regulator approves an organisation’s application, it awards them
charitable status, assigns them a Registered Charity Number and lists them as
a charity on the public register. The public register lists the charity’s:

  * Name 
  * Addresses 
  * Trustees’ names 
  * Objectives (why the charity has been set up and what it hopes to achieve) 
  * Registration number 
  * Financial records, including gross income and total expenditure 

You can [ search the charities register on charitiesregister.ie
](https://www.charitiesregulator.ie/en/information-for-the-public/search-the-
register-of-charities) .

**Refusals**

If the Charities Regulator refuses an organisation’s application to be
registered as a charity, it must tell the organisation why its application was
refused and that it can appeal the decision, see ‘Appeals’ below.

The Regulator can refuse to register an organisation for a number of reasons,
including for its choice of name. For example, they may refuse an organisation
if its name is:

  * Offensive 
  * The same as, or similar to, another charity 
  * Designed to mislead the public about its purposes or activities 
  * Likely to make the public believe it is connected with the Government, a local authority or anyone it is not connected with 

Once a charity is registered, its name can only be changed with the consent of
the Regulator.

**Removing a charity from the register**

The Charities Regulator must remove organisations from the register in certain
circumstances, for example, if a charity changes its name without the
Regulator’s consent, or if the Regulator thinks a charity is promoting
unlawful or immoral activities. There will be a statement in the register
explaining why they have been removed.

If a charity is removed from the register they must wait at least a year
before applying to be registered again.

**Appeals**

If the Regulator refuses an organisation’s application to be registered as a
charity, the organisation can appeal to the Charity Appeals Tribunal. The
appeal application must be made within 21 days of receiving written notice of
the refusal from the Regulator. The Regulator must accept the decision of the
Tribunal.
