###  Jobseeker's Allowance and work

To get Jobseeker’s Allowance you must be looking for full-time work – and you
must be able to show proof of this to the DSP.

If you are working 3 days a week or less, you may get JA for the days when you
do not work. However, you must show that you are still trying to get full-time
work.

If your employer reduces your days at work to 3 days a week or less, you may
get JA for the other days.

You must still meet the other conditions that apply to JA, such as pass the
means test. Income from work will affect the amount of JA you get.

If you have been getting long-term JA (for over 15 months or over 390 days)
and you take up part-time work for under 24 hours a week, you can apply for
the [ Part-time Job Incentive Scheme (PTJI). ](/en/social-welfare/social-
welfare-payments-and-work/part-time-job-incentive-scheme/) This scheme allows
you to work part-time and get a special weekly allowance instead of your
jobseeker’s payment.

Find out more in our document about [ how income from work is assessed for
Jobseeker’s Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/means-
test-for-social-welfare-payments/work-and-jobseekers-allowance/) .

If you have children and stop claiming JA when you start work, you can apply
for a [ Back to Work Family Dividend ](/en/social-welfare/families-and-
children/back-to-work-family-dividend/) .

You can use the [ Benefit of Work Estimator
](https://services.mywelfare.ie/en/topics/parents-children-family/benefit-of-
work-estimator-for-jobseekers-and-one-parent-families/) to find out how
starting work could affect your income. It works out the total amount you will
get if you take up full-time work and compares this to your jobseeker’s
payment.

**Self-employment and Jobseeker's Allowance**

If you are self-employed, you may be entitled to JA, depending on your income
from your business. You can find out more in our document about [ self-
employment and unemployment ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/self-
employed-and-unemployment/) . Self-employed farmers on a low income can apply
for [ Farm Assist ](/en/social-welfare/farming-and-fishing/farm-assist/) .

**Artists and Jobseeker's Allowance**

If you are a professional artist on JA, you can be exempt from l [ abour
market activation ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-people/employment-supports/)
for the first year that you are out of work. This means that you do not have
to show that you are looking for work. It allows professional artists who are
getting JA to focus on their artistic work. The Department of Social
Protection (DSP) provides a [ full list of professional art forms covered
(pdf)
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/27311/cbcb43e3c0144fa8bb145fe997f2324b.pdf#page=1)
.
