##  How do I apply?

There are a number of steps involved in applying for the scheme and claiming
payments. The [ forms are available on gov.ie
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e0a42-iforis-internet/) .

**1\. Consult a registered forester and submit your application form (Form
1)**

Contact a registered forester to help with your application. The registered
forester will visit your farm to complete a field assessment and make sure the
site is suitable for planting. The registered forester will then recommend
which option you should choose for the scheme and will help you prepare and
submit your application form.

Gov.ie has a [ list of registered foresters
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/205869-list-of-registered-foresters/) .

If your application is successful, you will get written confirmation from the
Department of of Agriculture, Food and the Marine. This will include the start
date of your contract. Once you get this confirmation, you can start planting
your trees.

**2\. Apply for the first grant instalment and premium (Form 2)**

Once you have planted your trees, you can submit an application to get your
first grant and premium payments. This must be done within 12 weeks of
planting your trees.

The registered forester must complete a site visit and a detailed field and
forest plot assessment to make sure the trees have been planted correctly. You
may also need to include supporting documentation with this form.

**3\. Apply for the second grant instalment (Form 3)**

You can apply for the second instalment grant 4 years after planting your
forest. This is done with your registered forester after they have completed a
site visit and a detailed field and forest plot assessment.

**4\. Apply for the remaining yearly premium payments**

You can apply for your second and subsequent yearly premiums online at [
www.agfood.ie ](http://www.agfood.ie/) . You can claim these payments
annually, as long as you are following the [ scheme terms and conditions (pdf)
](https://assets.gov.ie/272397/bd7eeafd-d554-4773-a32b-4c2b5fa357e8.pdf) .

You must apply for a premium within 3 years of the 1 January of the year in
which that particular premium was due for payment. For example, if a premium
was due in 2024, you must apply for it by 31 December 2026. Otherwise, you
will lose the premium.
