##  The difference between Jobseeker’s Benefit and Jobseeker’s Allowance

To get [ Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-benefit/) you must have enough social insurance (PRSI)
contributions. JB rates are graduated according to earnings. If you are
affected by this, it may be of greater benefit for you to claim Jobseeker's
Allowance.

To get [ Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) ](/en/social-welfare/unemployed-
people/jobseekers-allowance/) you must pass a means test. A means test is when
your income is calculated to see whether it falls below a certain level. If it
falls below a certain level, you can get Jobseeker’s Allowance.

You will always be assessed for Jobseeker’s Benefit first, unless you have
never worked before. When you apply for Jobseeker’s Benefit you are asked if
you want to be assessed for Jobseeker’s Allowance. This means that if you
don’t qualify for Jobseeker’s Benefit, you will not need to apply a second
time to be assessed for Jobseeker’s Allowance.

**If you work for part of a week** , you may qualify for a jobseeker's payment
for the days you are unemployed.

**If you leave work voluntarily or as a result of misconduct** , you cannot
get a jobseeker’s payment for 9 weeks. However, if you have ‘good cause’ to
leave voluntarily, for example, any changes in working conditions such as a
reduction in pay, harassment or abuse from your employer, you may get your
payment. The Deciding Officer in your local Intreo Centre or Social Welfare
Branch Office will decide whether you had good cause to leave voluntarily.

**If you are self-employed** you may get a jobseeker’s payment if you closed
your business or the amount of work you are getting has sufficiently reduced.
Find out more about [ self-employed people and unemployment ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/self-employed-and-unemployment/) .
