##  Introduction

If you are getting certain social welfare payments and you are providing full-
time care and attention to another person, you can keep your main social
welfare payment and get a half-rate Carer’s Allowance as well.

If you are in one of the following situations you may qualify for half-rate
Carer's Allowance:

  * **Already getting Carer's Allowance but also meet the qualifying criteria for another social welfare payment**

If you are getting Carer's Allowance and you also meet the qualifying
conditions for another social welfare payment (for example, a State pension)
you should apply for the other payment. If you qualify for the other payment
you will be paid it in full and keep half your Carer’s Allowance payment as
well. (For a list of social welfare payments paid with half-rate Carer's
Allowance - see 'Rules' below)

If you are currently getting Carer’s Allowance and your spouse, civil partner
or cohabitant is claiming another social welfare payment (for example,
Jobseeker’s Allowance), your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant may claim an
increase in their social welfare payment for you as a qualified adult and your
Carer’s Allowance will be reduced by 50%. This can only be done with your
consent but it may increase your total household income.

  * **Changed from another social welfare payment to get Carer's Allowance**

If you were on another social welfare payment before claiming Carer's
Allowance, you may get your original payment reinstated and also get half-rate
Carer's Allowance, if you continue to meet the qualifying conditions for both
schemes. (For a list of social welfare payments payable with half-rate Carer's
Allowance - see 'Rules' below)

  * **Caring for someone and being claimed for by a spouse, civil partner or cohabitant**

If your spouse, civil partner or cohabitant is claiming for you as a qualified
adult on their payment and you are providing full-time care to another person,
you can apply for half-rate Carer's Allowance and keep your current [ Increase
for a Qualified Adult ](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/claiming-a-social-welfare-payment/claiming-an-increase-in-your-social-
welfare-payment-for-an-adult-dependant/) in full.

  * **Getting a social welfare payment other than Carer's Allowance and caring for someone**

If you are getting one of the social welfare payments payable with half-rate
Carer's Allowance (see 'Rules' below) and caring for someone, you may keep
your social welfare payment and qualify for half-rate Carer’s Allowance.
