###  Your child in school

**Schools hours and days**

The length of the school day in primary school is 5 hours and 40 minutes. This
includes assembly time, roll-call and breaks which are usually around 11am and
12.30pm. Primary schools may reduce the school day by an hour for children in
their first 2 years at primary school (commonly called _junior infants_ and
_senior infants_ ) and in their third year at primary school (commonly called
_first class_ ). You can read the [ Department of Education Circular 11/95
Time in School (Primary) (pdf) ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/15685/6e55f1a07b994e57870eb6dd83edf415.pdf) .

Overall, primary schools must be open for a minimum of 183 days in each school
year. All schools must close for the months of July and August. [ Christmas,
Easter and mid-term breaks are standardised ](/en/education/primary-and-post-
primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/school-terms-in-
primary-and-postprimary/) in both primary and post-primary schools.

**Teachers and staff**

The principal is responsible for running the school. Each class has a class
teacher who teaches all subjects to their class. In some smaller schools the
teacher has more than one class. There may be other teachers in the school
such as a [ language support teacher ](/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-
education/educational-supports/resources-for-non-english-speakers/) to help
learn English or a learning support teacher to help children who are having
difficulty with the curriculum. Schools set their own policy in relation to
homework.

**Starting class**

Children starting school for the first time will be in junior infants class.
If your child has attended school before, the principal, you and the class
teacher will decide together which class your child will be in. Primary school
children are [ only allowed to repeat a year for educational reasons and in
special situations
](https://www.gov.ie/pdf/?file=https://assets.gov.ie/15376/27b5fe97641e4ea7b137bfd125bb5e4b.pdf#page=null)
. You can get more information in the Department's circular [ retention of
primary pupils in the same grade ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/15376/27b5fe97641e4ea7b137bfd125bb5e4b.pdf) .

The [ school must provide reports for each child
](https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1998/act/51/enacted/en/html) and the
school must allow parents to have access to their child's school record.
Schools usually hold a parent/teacher meeting during the year. If you are
concerned about your child's progress at any stage during the year, you can
speak to the class teacher.

**Uniforms and school bags**

While students do not have to wear a uniform at primary school, many schools
(in consultation with parents) have introduced school uniforms. Check with
your school about their policy. The Department has published [ recommendations
on school uniforms
](https://circulars.gov.ie/pdf/circular/education/2017/32.pdf) and on the [
the weight of schoolbags. ](https://s3-eu-
west-1.amazonaws.com/govieassets/38263/57a592bfdedc4b97a12404a7f0b853fb.pdf)
