####  Investment projects

€30 million is allocated to **recommence the State’s house-building
programme** . This will facilitate up to 500 additional housing units between
a small number of new infill developments and the return of previously
uninhabitable units to the housing stock.

€10 million will be provided for an **unfinished housing estate resolution
initiative** where there is no development bond to carry out essential public
works such as footpaths, drainage and roads.

Investments by NAMA will include the **construction of 4,500 new houses and
apartments in Dublin** .

Part of the €200 million to be invested from the sale of the National Lottery
licence in 2014 will be allocated to the **Better Energy Programme** and for
up to 5,700 **housing adaptation grants for older people and people with a
disability** .

€10 million is allocated to resolve the problems at **Priory Hall** .

A new model of financing social interventions, to be called ' **Social Impact
Investment** ' will aim to use private capital to provide better outcomes for
citizens. The pilot phase is seeking private sector investment partners to
provide long-term homes for over 130 homeless families in the Dublin region. A
total of €45 million is being provided for homeless accommodation.

There will also be a **new insulation scheme for local authority housing** .
It is expected that the €25 million being provided will improve the energy
efficiency of 12,500 local authority homes.

€79 million will be provided for **housing regeneration** .

Up to 150 new leased units will be provided for **people with disabilities who
are leaving institutional care** and 175 new housing units will be provided
for **people with special needs** .

A new remediation scheme will be set up for **homes affected by Pyrite** .

The **Living City Initiative** is being extended to Cork, Galway, Kilkenny and
Dublin. The eligibility criteria will now include all buildings built prior to
1915. The initiative aims to assist the regeneration of retail and commercial
districts and encourage families to live in historic buildings in city
centres. EU state-aid approval will be required.
