####  Small and medium businesses

A **Start Your Own Business (SYOB)** measure is being introduced to encourage
people who are long-term unemployed to start their own unincorporated
business, by providing a two-year exemption from income tax (up to a maximum
of €40,000 per year) for people who have been unemployed for at least 15
months prior to starting their own business.

**Local Enterprise Offices** will get additional funding of €3.5 million for
investment in supports for start-ups and growing businesses.

**Trading-online voucher scheme** : In 2014 €5 million will be provided to
assist the rollout of a national trading-online voucher scheme, aimed at
getting 2,000 small Irish businesses trading online. Under a pilot scheme
being launched in October 2013, vouchers of up to €2,500 will be provided to
50 small companies to help them develop an online trading presence. The scheme
will be administered by the Dublin City Enterprise Board and will target small
enterprises that employ fewer than 10 people and have a turnover of less than
€2m per annum.

**Credit Review Office** : the threshold for credit applications that can be
reviewed by the Credit Review Office is being increased from €500,000 to €3
million.

The **VAT cash threshold** for small and medium enterprises will increase from
€1.25 million to €2 million with effect from 1 May 2014\.

A new **SME Communications Strategy** will aim to increase awareness of State
supports amongst small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and to ensure that there
is a greater awareness amongst businesses of the Credit Guarantee Scheme,
which will soon be re-launched.

A new **Building Business Capacity** programme, consisting of 2 days dedicated
off-site training and expert mentoring support, will aim to enhance the
business and financial capacity of SMEs in relation to understanding and using
a broader range of financial products, as well as equipping them with tools
needed to make a strong business case when applying for credit. The programme
will be launched on a pilot basis, with 1,000 SMEs expected to take part in
2014.
