**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > Neighbour
disputes

#  Neighbour disputes

  * [ Boundary disputes between neighbours ](/en/justice/neighbour-disputes/boundary-disputes/)

The general rule is that any boundaries between your land and your neighbour’s
land are jointly owned by both you and your neighbour. But you may be able to
prove that you own a boundary structure outright.

  * [ Noise pollution and noise complaints ](/en/environment/pollution/noise-regulations/)

The rules as regards the control of noise, the various bodies responsible and
how to complain about excessive noise

**This document is in:** [ Pollution ](/en/environment/pollution/)

  * [ Dog licences and ownership ](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/control-of-dogs/)

Rules on owning and control your dogs in Ireland. Includes licensing,
microchipping and restrictions for certain breeds.

**This document is in:** [ Pets, wildlife and biodiversity
](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/)

  * [ Horse identification and control ](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/control-of-horses/)

All horses, ponies and donkeys must have passports and must be registered and
microchipped. Also, in specified local authority control areas, you need a
licence to keep a horse.

**This document is in:** [ Pets, wildlife and biodiversity
](/en/environment/pets-and-wildlife/)

  * [ Burning waste and vegetation ](/en/environment/waste-and-recycling/burning-household-waste/)

Burning household waste at home or in your garden is illegal. If convicted of
illegally burning waste, you can incur a fine or a prison sentence.

**This document is in:** [ Waste and recycling ](/en/environment/waste-and-
recycling/)

  * [ Anti-social behaviour by adults ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/anti-social-behaviour-by-adults/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 has provisions dealing with anti-social
behaviour by adults. These provisions allow gardaí to deal with anti-social
behaviour through a civil process using behaviour warnings and orders or
ASBOs.

**This document is in:** [ Law enforcement ](/en/justice/law-enforcement/)

  * [ Anti-social behaviour by children ](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/anti-social-behaviour-by-children/)

The Criminal Justice Act 2006 introduced provisions for dealing with anti-
social behaviour by children. These provisions allow the Gardaí to deal with
anti-social behaviour in a number of ways.

**This document is in:** [ Children and young offenders
](/en/justice/children-and-young-offenders/)

  * [ Anti-social behaviour and rent arrears in social housing ](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/anti-social-behaviour-and-rent-arrears-in-social-housing/)

Local authorities can evict tenants who are engaging in anti-social behaviour
or are in rent arrears..

**This document is in:** [ Local authority and social housing
](/en/housing/local-authority-and-social-housing/)

  * [ Rights of way ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-owners/right-of-way/)

A right of way allows you to travel over land that belongs to someone else.
This page describes public and private rights of way, as well as how to
establish and register a right of way.

**This document is in:** [ Owning your home ](/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/)

  * [ Planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-permission/planning-permission/)

Introduction to the different types of planning permission as well as how and
where to apply for planning permission.

**This document is in:** [ Planning permission ](/en/housing/planning-
permission/)
