####  **General, regional and local hospitals**

You can get treatment for many issues at large general and regional hospitals.
Smaller local hospitals may not be able to cater for all illnesses and
treatments and you may be transferred to a larger hospital or to a specialist
hospital. You can [ find the location and contact details of your local
hospital ](https://www2.hse.ie/services/hospitals/) .

**Inpatient or day-case**

If you are getting planned (scheduled) care or emergency (unscheduled) care,
this is known as inpatient care. This includes care needing an overnight stay
the hospital as well as care provided through the day case services.

**Out-patient services**

If you have an out-patient appointment, you will not be staying overnight in
the hospital. Your family doctor can refer you for a planned appointment in an
**out-patients** department of a public hospital. This will be with a
consultant or their team or for diagnostic assessments (for example, x-rays,
laboratory tests, physiotherapy).

**Emergency Department**

If you have serious injuries or life-threatening emergencies, you can go to
the Emergency Department (sometimes called Accident and Emergency Department).
This is usually as an out-patient. They are open 24 hours a day, every day of
the year. [ Find your local Emergency Department.
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/emergency-departments/)

Phone 112 or 999 if you need urgent medical help or you're not sure what to
do.

**Minor injury unit**

If you have a minor injury, [ check if your local minor injury unit may be
able treat you ](https://www2.hse.ie/emergencies/when-to-visit-an-injury-
unit/#What-injury-units-can-treat) . There is a â‚¬75 charge to attend an injury
unit. There is no charge for patients with a medical card, or a medical or GP
referral letter.

Minor injuries are unlikely to require admission to a hospital. You can [
check where the nearest minor injury unit is to you
](https://www2.hse.ie/services/injury-units/) .
