###  The verdict

At the conclusion of the trial, the jurors are given an issue paper, which
states the issues that the jury must consider in reaching its verdict. When a
jury consists of more than 12 members, only 12 are selected to consider the
verdict.

A Court Garda or other official is required to keep the jury together until
the verdict is reached. The jury is taken into the jury room and allowed no
outside communication at all, with the exception of notes to the Court
Registrar. They may keep a copy of the indictment, the exhibits and their
notes.

Jurors may send out notes asking for the law to be further explained or for
the judge to remind them of the details of the evidence. They will then be
brought back into the court for the judge to give them such assistance as
he/she can but there can be no new evidence at this stage.

In reaching its verdict in a [ criminal trial ](/en/justice/criminal-
law/criminal-trial/criminal-trial/) , the jury must be satisfied that the
person is guilty _beyond reasonable doubt_ . Beyond reasonable doubt means
that if there are two reasons given in the case and both are possible
explanations for what happened, taken together with the evidence presented,
the jury should give the person the benefit of the doubt and decide on a
verdict of not guilty.

If the case is a civil one, the jury must be satisfied with its verdict on the
balance of probabilities.

It is not necessary that a jury be unanimous in its verdict. In a criminal
case, a verdict need not be unanimous where there are not fewer than 11 jurors
if 10 of them agree on a verdict after considering the case for a reasonable
time (not less than two hours). In a civil trial, a verdict may be reached by
a majority of 9 of the 12 members.

When the jury has reached its decision, it will return to the court and the
verdict will be read out by the foreman or forewoman.

The jury has no role in [ sentencing ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/sentence/) . This decision is left up to the judge following submissions
made by both sides.

For more information about acting as a juror, read our document on [ jury
service ](/en/justice/courtroom/jury-service/) .
