##  Information

The jury fulfils a very important function in the legal system. You are
entitled to be tried by jury unless the alleged offence is a minor one or one
that is being tried in the [ Special Criminal Court ](/en/justice/courts-
system/special-criminal-court/) . However, a jury is not required in every
legal case. There will be a jury in some civil cases such as defamation and
assault cases. However, for the majority of civil cases such as personal
injuries actions and family law cases, there is no jury - it is the [ judge
](/en/justice/courtroom/judge/) who decides the outcome.

The jury consists of 12 members of the public who sit in a box to one side of
the judge. One of the jurors is selected as a foreman of the jury by the
members of the jury before the case starts. He or she acts as an informal
chairperson and spokesperson for the jury.

The 12 jurors in a case are selected from a number of people who have been
called to do their jury service on that day.

Section 23 of the [ Courts and Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2013
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2013/en/act/pub/0032/sec0023.html#sec23)
amended the [ Juries Act 1976
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/1976/en/act/pub/0004/index.html) so that the
jury can consist of up to 15 members, if the case is expected to last more
than 2 months.

The jurors are charged with the responsibility of deciding whether, on the
facts of the case, a person is guilty or not guilty of the offence for which
he or she has been charged.

The jury must reach its verdict by considering only the [ evidence
](/en/justice/evidence/evidence-introduction/) introduced in court and the
directions of the judge. The jury does not interpret the law. It follows the
directions of the judge as regards legal matters.

During all stages of the trial, jurors may take notes of proceedings. Jurors
may also pass notes to the foreman or forewoman of the jury to ask the judge
to explain certain aspects of the case.
