##  Introduction

Michael has been working for the same company for over 10 years. The company
has run into difficulties and 12 months ago it temporarily reduced the number
of days employees work each week from 5 days to 3 days. When this happened
Michael went to his local Intreo Centre where he was assessed for Jobseeker’s
Benefit (JB).

As Michael’s number of days at work had been reduced **temporarily** from 5
days per week to 3 days per week he was assessed as a systematic short time
worker. This means that he is considered unemployed for 2 days a week. He is
paid 2/5th of the weekly rate of JB for these 2 days.

Michael has been getting Jobseeker’s Benefit for a year and wants to know how
long he can continue to get [ Jobseeker’s Benefit ](/en/social-
welfare/unemployed-people/jobseekers-benefit/) ?

**Answer**

The number of days a person can claim Jobseeker’s Benefit (JB) depends on a
number of factors. Since Michael has over 260 [ PRSI contributions
](/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/social-
insurance-classes/) he is entitled to 234 days JB. He is claiming 2 days JB
every week. Divide 234 by the number of days he claims JB each week to find
the potential number of weeks he could claim JB.

234 ÷ 2 = 117 weeks

This means, he could potentially claim JB for 117 weeks, that is, over 2
years. For the last 12 months (52 weeks) Michael has been getting 2 days
Jobseeker’s Benefit for systematic short time work. To find out how many days
JB he has used to date, multiply the number of days JB he gets each week by
the number of weeks he is claiming JB.

2 x 52 = 104

He has used up 104 days of his Jobseeker’s Benefit.

To find the number of days he has left on his JB claim, subtract the number of
days he has used (104 days) from the maximum number he can claim (234 days).

234 – 104 = 130 days

This means, he has 130 days (or 65 weeks) of Jobseeker’s Benefit remaining
**if he continues to be assessed as a systematic short-time worker.** However,
2 years is not short term and Michael is currently being assessed as
temporarily laid off from work i.e. as a systematic short-time worker.

The Department of Social Protection (DSP) will reassess a systematic short
time worker’s JB claim if it goes on for an extended period. If DSP decide
that it is unlikely he will return to full-time work with that company in the
short term, he will be reassessed as a part-time worker and will have to meet
the conditions for JB to continue to get JB.

DSP uses a 5-day week for systematic short time working and a 6-day week for
part-time working (note that this is different from the payment week which is
5 days for both). If Michael is reassessed as a part-time worker and continues
to work 3 days per week for his employer, he will be considered to be
unemployed for 3 days a week rather than 2 days a week (this means that his JB
claim will end sooner).

If he is reassessed as a part-time worker and continues his current work
pattern and continues to qualify for Jobseeker’s Benefit, he will have 130
days of JB remaining. Divide130 by the number of days he claims JB each week
to find the number of weeks left on his JB claim.

130 ÷ 3 = 43 weeks (approx)

_**Page edited:** 11 January 2023 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Case%20study%3A%20Jobseeker%E2%80%99s%20Benefit%20and%20systematic%20short%20time%0A%20%20work&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Case%20study%3A%20Jobseeker%E2%80%99s%20Benefit%20and%20systematic%20short%20time%0A%20%20work&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-
welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/case-studies-checklists/case-study-
jobseekers-benefit-and-systematic-short-time-
work/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
