##  Overview

The Supplementary Welfare Allowance Scheme consists of a basic payment, called
Supplementary Welfare Allowance, and other financial supplements for certain
expenses you may not be able to meet, including emergency situations. It is
administered by the [ Community Welfare Officer (CWO) ](/en/social-
welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/community-welfare-services-and-
payments/) in your [ local Community Welfare Service
](https://www.gov.ie/en/collection/cb07d7-supplementary-welfare-allowance-swa-
list-of-offices-administering-swa/) .

[ Basic Supplementary Welfare Allowance ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-
welfare-schemes/supplementary-welfare-allow/) (SWA) is a weekly payment for
people that have low income or no income. For example, SWA can be paid to you
while the Department Employment Affairs and of Social Protection (DSP) is
processing your claim for another payment. If you are in hospital for a
temporary stay and do not qualify for any other payment, you may be paid a
small amount for your daily personal needs (for example, newspapers and
toiletries). This payment (known as Hospital Comforts) is paid as a basic SWA
payment and is means tested).

[ Rent Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/rent-
supplement/) is a payment to help with the cost of rent for people living in
privately rented accommodation.

[ Mortgage Interest Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/mortgage-interest-supplement/) was a payment to help with the cost of
mortgage interest repayments. The Mortgage Interest Supplement scheme closed
to new entrants from 1 January 2014, and no new applications were accepted
from this date. The scheme was wound down for people who were getting Mortgage
Interest Supplement before 1 January 2014 over a 4-year period and closed on
31 December 2017. However, claimants who were getting MIS payments that were
due to end on that date continue to get payments under the Supplementary
Welfare Scheme from 1 January 2018.

The amount you get is equal to the MIS payment that you were getting before 31
December 2017. This payment is made automatically and there is no need to re-
apply to the DSP.

[ Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance ](/en/social-
welfare/families-and-children/back-to-school-clothing-and-footwear-allowance/)
is a payment to help with the cost of uniforms and footwear for children at
school.

[ Diet Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/diet-and-
heating-supplements/) is a payment to help with the cost of a special diet
prescribed by your doctor or hospital consultant (it is no longer paid to new
applicants).

[ Heating Supplement ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-schemes/diet-
and-heating-supplements/) is a payment to help people who have extra heating
needs with the cost of heating their home. For example, people that are ill or
have a disability.

[ Additional Needs Payment ](/en/social-welfare/supplementary-welfare-
schemes/additional-needs-payment/) is a payment to help with an expense that
you cannot pay from your weekly income. For example, it can help with funeral
costs, housing costs and fuel bills. You must have a low income.
