**English** |  Gaeilge 

**You are here:** [ Home ](/en/) > [ Justice ](/en/justice/) > [ Criminal law
](/en/justice/criminal-law/) > Criminal offences

#  Criminal offences

  * [ Classification of crimes in criminal cases ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/classification-of-crimes-in-criminal-cases/)

The way in which a criminal offence is investigated and prosecuted depends on
the type of crime involved. For these purposes criminal offences may be
described in different ways.

  * [ Public order offences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/public-order-offenses-in-ireland/)

The law on public order offences is mainly set down in the Criminal Justice
(Public Order) Act 1994. It deals with how people behave in public places and
also provides for crowd control at public events. Find out more about the
different types of offences.

  * [ Drug offences ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/drug-offences/)

In Ireland the Misuse of Drugs Act 1977 as amended by other legislation is the
principal legislation that covers drug offences and the respective penalties.

  * [ Alcohol and the law ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/alcohol-and-the-law/)

Laws are in place regarding the serving of alcohol on licensed premises and
off-licences, drinking in public and drink driving.

  * [ The law on selling or buying sex ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-buying-and-selling-sex/)

Selling sexual services is legal in Ireland in some circumstances.

  * [ The law on hate speech ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/law-on-hate-speech/)

The Prohibition of Incitement to Hatred Act 1989 sets out the law on hate
speech in Ireland.

  * [ Fireworks: the law ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/the-law-on-fireworks/)

Only the least dangerous fireworks are allowed to be sold to the public. The
Garda√≠ now have the power to make arrests in relation to the possession of
unlicensed fireworks.

  * [ Sharing of intimate images without consent ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/sharing-of-intimate-images-without-consent/)

This document provides information about criminal liability for the sharing of
intimate images. It includes detail about the kinds of images that may be
considered intimate and the specific offences for which you may be charged.

  * [ Owning and using a firearm in Ireland ](/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-offences/firearms-in-ireland/)

You can apply to own and use a firearm in Ireland with certain restrictions.
Firearms can include guns, crossbows or airguns. Find out about gun laws in
Ireland and how to apply for your firearm licence.

  * [ Drink driving offences ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/drink-driving-offences-in-ireland/)

Drink driving is a very serious offence. Find out about the law on drink
driving, including random breath testing, powers of the Gardai and procedures
if you are arrested.

**This document is in:** [ Driving offences ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/)

  * [ Driving offences ](/en/travel-and-recreation/motoring/driving-offences/driving-offences/)

An overview of the most common driving offences in Ireland, the penalties that
are in place, and information on how to appeal.

**This document is in:** [ Driving offences ](/en/travel-and-
recreation/motoring/driving-offences/)
