###  Farm income and other income from self-employment

Farm income and other income from off-farm self-employment is assessed at 70%
(down from 100% since March 2017), with additional annual disregards of €254
for each of the first two children and €381 for the third and other children.
(The disregards for dependent children are applied first and 70% of the
balance is assessed.)

Your income from farming is assessed as gross income that you, your spouse,
civil partner or cohabitant may be expected to receive minus any expenses you
incur to earn that income. Your income from the previous 12 months is used to
assess your likely future earnings. However, it is not simply assumed that
your previous year’s earnings will be repeated the following year as farmers
can have significant variations in income from year to year.

When you apply for Farm Assist, a social welfare inspector will call to see
you and ask to see various documents. For example, accounts prepared for tax
purposes, creamery returns, cattle registration cards, details of headage
payments and area aid. They will also want information on the sale of crops,
cattle, milk and other produce. The inspector will then assess the costs
actually and necessarily incurred in connection with the running of the farm.
These costs may include rent, annuities, the cost of inputs like feed and
fertiliser and the depreciation of farm machinery. Labour costs are taken into
account, with the exception of the labour of the farmer and their spouse,
civil partner or cohabitant. You are entitled to receive a copy of this farm
income calculation.

If you or your spouse, cohabitant or civil partner has other income from self-
employment, this is also assessed, taking into account the costs incurred in
the business. The income from farming and other forms of self-employment is
added together and the costs involved are deducted.

You may be liable to pay [ Class S contributions ](/en/social-welfare/irish-
social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/class-s-prsi/) on your income from
self-employment.
