#####  Site updates

Some once-off cost of living payments announced in [ Budget 2024
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/budgets/budget-2024/)
will be paid this week:

  * If you get [ Fuel Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/extra-social-welfare-benefits/fuel-allowance/) , you will get a lump sum of €300 – the exact payment date varies per person 
  * If you get [ Working Family Payment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/families-and-children/working-family-payment/) , you will get a lump sum of €400 on 23 November 2023 
  * If you get [ Disability Allowance ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/disability-allowance/) , [ Invalidity Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/invalidity-pension/) and [ Blind Pension ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/social-welfare-payments/disability-and-illness/blind-persons-pension/) , you will get a lump sum of €400 between 22 and 24 November 2023 (you get the once-off payment on the same day you get your primary payment) 

To request a late student grant application, you must [ complete a Late
Application Form 2023-2024
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/third-level-education/fees-
and-supports-for-third-level-education/student-grant-scheme/#4d7e38) and email
it to [ lateapplications@susi.ie ](mailto:lateapplications@susi.ie) . Late
applications will only be accepted in certain circumstances.

People who have a submeter are now eligible for the [ Electricity Account
Credit ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-
account-credit/#31d1bf) . Previously, households with submeters were not
eligible (submeters are linked to a primary meter with an MPRN). A new [ low
usage threshold applies
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/consumer/utilities/electricity-
account-credit/#33b71c) where households that use less than 150kWh a quarter
in 4 consecutive quarters will not be eligible for the credit.

People from Ukraine covered by the Temporary Protection Directive can take [
Christmas leave from their accommodation
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/asylum-seekers-and-
refugees/the-asylum-process-in-ireland/coming-to-ireland-from-ukraine/#4583cd)
without needing to request an absence. Christmas absences run from 22 December
2023 to 8 January 2024.

On 13 November 2023, new regulations came into effect on [ monitoring and
treatment of sex offenders in Ireland
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-
trial/sex-offenders-register/) . The changes:

  * Reduce the notification period for sex offenders to inform Gardaí of changes to personal information (such as change of address) from 7 days to 3 days 
  * Allow Gardaí to take fingerprints, palm-prints or photographs to confirm the identity of an offender 
  * Allow Gardaí to disclose information about people on the sex offender register where there is a serious risk to the public 
  * Ensure that the courts can stop an offender from working with children 

The [ Local Authority Home Loan
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/help-with-
buying-a-home/local-authority-mortgages/) is due to be extended in 2024, so
you will be able to use it to buy and renovate derelict and non-habitable
homes.

From 1 December 2023, social housing tenants who [ rent a room in their home
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning-a-home/home-
owners/renting-a-room-in-your-home/) to a third-level student qualify for
rent-a-room relief.

Scholarship payments under UCD’s Cothrom na Féine Scholarship Programme of up
to €7,000 per year are not included in the [ means test
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-
system/means-test-for-social-welfare-payments/cash-income-not-included-in-the-
social-welfare-means-test/) for most social welfare payments.

From 1 January 2024, [ paid sick leave
](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/employment/employment-rights-and-
conditions/leave-and-holidays/sick-leave-and-sick-pay/) increases from 3 to 5
days a year.

**New and recently edited**

New pages:

  * [ Long-term Carers Contributions ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/social-welfare/irish-social-welfare-system/social-insurance-prsi/long-term-carers-contributions/)
  * [ Commercial Vehicle Roadworthiness Test in Ireland (CVRT) ](/en/travel-and-recreation/vehicle-standards/commercial-vehicle-roadworthiness-test-in-ireland-cvrt/)

These pages have been reviewed and improved:

  * [ Choosing a post-primary school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/going-to-post-primary-school/types-of-post-primary-school/)
  * [ Leaving school ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/education/further-education-and-training/leaving-school/)
  * [ Becoming an Irish citizen through naturalisation ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/irish-citizenship/becoming-an-irish-citizen-through-naturalisation/)
  * [ Migrant workers and unemployment ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/moving-country/working-in-ireland/migrant-workers/migrant-workers-and-unemployment/)
  * [ How your income tax is calculated ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/money-and-tax/tax/income-tax/how-your-tax-is-calculated/)
  * [ Court poor box ](https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal-law/criminal-trial/court-poor-box/)
