##  TWSS and tax, PRSI and USC

Income tax and USC was not applied to the subsidy through the payroll. To
reduce the amount of tax that may arise at the end of the year, Revenue placed
all employees that received payments under the TWSS or PUP on a Week 1 basis.
Revenue issued Week 1 Revenue Payroll Notifications (RPNs) to employers.
Employers used the most recent RPN so employees were switched to the Week 1
basis as quickly as possible.

When an end of the year review takes place, an employee’s unused tax credits
may be enough to cover any tax liability. Where this is not the case, and they
have underpaid tax, Revenue will normally collect the underpayment by reducing
the employee’s tax credits for a future year(s) in order to minimise any
hardship. If the employee has any additional tax credits to claim, for example
health expenses, this will also reduce any tax due.

In many cases, the payment of the Temporary COVID-19 Wage Subsidy and any
additional income paid by the employer will result in the refund of income tax
or USC already paid by the employee. Any income tax and USC refunds that arise
as a result of the application of tax credits and rate bands can be repaid by
the employer and Revenue will also refund this amount to the employer.

On 25 September 2020, Revenue provided more information on the [ taxation of
payments under the TWSS ](https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/press-
office/press-releases/2020/pr-250920-revenue-update-on-ewss-sweepback-
payments.aspx) . In January 2021, Revenue will make a Preliminary End of Year
Statement available to all employees. The statement will give employees a
preliminary calculation of their income tax and USC position for 2020. It will
tell you whether your tax position is balanced or if you have underpaid or
overpaid your tax for 2020. If you have an underpayment of taxes, the
following applies:

  * You can arrange to fully or partially repay the tax due through the payments/repayments facility in myAccount, or 
  * Revenue will collect the underpayment by reducing your tax credits over the following 4 years, starting in January 2022. You will not have to pay interest on any underpayment. 
