##  Wildlife on Irish beaches

You cannot take natural items you find on beaches in Ireland. This includes
sand, shells or seaweed. You need [ a foreshore license to harvest seaweed
](https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/4ddcf-foreshore-your-questions-
answered/#is-a-foreshore-consent-required-for-seaweed-harvesting) on beaches
in Ireland.

**Jellyfish**

Jellyfish are swimming sea animals with an umbrella-shaped bell and trailing
tentacles that sting. Jellyfish stings can be painful, but most are not
emergencies in Ireland. With a typical sting, you may have:

  * Pain 
  * Red marks 
  * Itching 
  * Numbness 
  * Tingling 

Check the [ Jellyfish Identifying card (pdf) ](https://watersafety.ie/wp-
content/uploads/2017/12/jellyfish-id-card.pdf) and read about [ how to treat a
jelly-fish sting ](https://www.beaches.ie/how-to-handle-a-jellyfish-sting/) .

**Venomous weever fish**

Venomous weever fish are small fish that are usually buried under the sand on
Irish beaches where the water is shallow. If you step on a weever fish, it’s
sting can be extremely painful. It usually does not cause permanent damage.

Weever fish are difficult to see. Try to avoid being stung by not swimming 1
to 2 hours before and after low water and wearing footwear if you are walking
or swimming on the beach near low water. [ Read more about venomous weever
fish and how to treat a sting ](https://watersafety.ie/recreation/) .

**Seals**

If you see a seal on the beach, stay at a distance from it and do not feed it.
Avoid swimming in the water if they are close to your bathing area. If you are
on a boat, you should not feed seals, as a large grey seal could capsize a
small boat. If you find a stranded, injured or entangled seal [ contact Seal
Rescue Ireland ](https://www.sealrescueireland.org/) .

**Beached sea-animals**

If you find a stranded, injured or entangled whale, porpoise or dolphin you
can call the [ ORCA Ireland ](https://www.orcaireland.org/) helpline. Make
sure to give them as much information as possible about the animal’s location
and condition. Keep away from the animal and make sure that your dog is on a
lead.

**Other wildlife**

Some beaches have areas where wildlife is protected. Look out for signs asking
you to keep out of certain areas. There are birds that nest on the ground and
are at risk from people and dogs. You should keep your dog on a lead on these
beaches during nesting season, which is between March and August.
