##  Costs

There is no fixed rate of charges for legal fees in Ireland. As with all other
service providers, it is advisable to obtain some quotes before deciding on
legal representation. Your solicitor must advise you in writing of the fees
you will be charged for their services. If it is not possible to give you a
definite sum, they must estimate a sum or at the very least describe the basis
upon which charges or fees will be calculated.

Generally in litigation the normal rule with regard to costs is that ‘costs
follow the event’, for example the successful party is generally entitled to
their costs. Of course if you lose that means that generally you become liable
for the costs of the winning party.

The Planning and Development Act as amended, by way of section 50B, provides
special rules in order to comply with the Public Participation Directive and
with the [ Aarhus Convention ](/en/environment/environment-and-the-law/aarhus-
convention/) . In cases involving the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA),
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) and Integrated Pollution Prevention
and Control directives (IPPC), a member of the public seeking a review of a
public decision will generally not be liable for their costs if they lose and
may be entitled to their costs from the losing party if they win. An applicant
may also be awarded their costs in cases of exceptional importance and where
it is in the interests of justice. This was amended by [ Section 29
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/act/16/section/29/enacted/en/html#sec29)
of the [ Planning and Development (Amendment) Act, 2018
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/2018/act/16/enacted/en/html) to apply the
Aarhus Convention special cost rules to judicial reviews of decisions, actions
or omissions made under national law implementing the appropriate assessment
provisions of the Habitats Directive.

There are, however, some exemptions to this rule and an order of costs may be
awarded against a party to proceedings in certain circumstances including:

  * Where a case is deemed to be vexatious or frivolous 
  * The manner in which a party has conducted the proceedings, or 
  * If a party is in contempt of court 

In the [ Environment (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2011/en/act/pub/0020/index.html) these rules
were extended to reviews of decisions in certain other environmental cases.

A list of the types of cases to which these rules apply is provided for at [
section 4
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2011/en/act/pub/0020/sec0004.html#sec4) of
the Environmental (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act. Section 4 was amended by the
Planning and Development (Amendment) Act, 2018. The rules arising under the
requirements of the Aarhus Convention (concerning legal costs) now also apply
to challenges of decisions, actions or omissions made under statutory
provisions giving effect to Article 6.3 and 6.4 of the 1992 EU Habitats
Directive relating to Appropriate Assessment.

[ Section 7
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2011/en/act/pub/0020/sec0007.html) of the
Environment (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011 provides for a procedure where
a person can apply to a court, prior to taking proceedings, to determine if
the case in question qualifies for the special cost rules. This means that an
applicant can find out at an early stage what the financial risks are likely
to be if they proceed with the case. If the Court does not agree that the case
falls under the cost rules, the applicant can reconsider the proceedings and
the associated costs risk.

To further reduce costs, it is open to anyone taking a case in environmental
matters to enquire from legal practitioners if they are willing to take the
case on a ‘no foal, no fee’ basis. Under such an agreement, if you win your
case you will be entitled to recover your costs from the losing side, and if
you lose your case, your legal representatives have agreed not to seek their
fees.

See courts.ie for [ information on the court fees payable
](https://www.courts.ie/content/common-court-fees) .

The Environment (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011 also [ requires that
judicial notice be taken of the Aarhus Convention
](http://www.irishstatutebook.ie/2011/en/act/pub/0020/sec0008.html) .

_**Page edited:** 24 April 2019 _

[
](https://facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/judicial-review-in-planning-and-environmental-
matters/?utm_source=sharebutton_facebook) [
](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Judicial%20review%20in%20planning%20and%20environmental%20matters&url=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/judicial-review-in-planning-and-environmental-
matters/?utm_source=sharebutton_twitter) [
](whatsapp://send?text=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/judicial-review-in-planning-and-environmental-
matters/?utm_source=sharebutton_whatsapp) [
](mailto:?subject=Judicial%20review%20in%20planning%20and%20environmental%20matters&body=https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/environment/environment-
and-the-law/judicial-review-in-planning-and-environmental-
matters/?utm_source=sharebutton_email) [ ](javascript:void\(0\))
