##  Introduction

Public decisions made by administrative bodies and the lower courts, may be
judicially reviewed by the High Court. In a judicial review, the court is not
concerned with the merits of the decision but rather with the lawfulness of
the decision-making process, for example how the decision was made and the
fairness of it.

The basic principles of public decision-making are:

  * The decision-maker must have authority to make the decision that affects you. If the decision-maker has the authority to make the decision, it must not go beyond the limits of its authority 
  * You are entitled to fair procedures in how the decision is reached. This means that the decision-maker must not be biased and the decision-maker must give you a fair hearing. You must be given an adequate opportunity to present your case. You must be informed of the matter and you must be given a chance to comment on the material put forward by the other side. 
  * The decision maker must comply with all legal requirements governing the decision and its making. 

If the decision-maker does not have authority or does not give you fair
procedures or does not comply with the law, you may bring judicial review
proceedings in the High Court to challenge the decision. You must show that
you have an arguable case, that is, that your case has grounds. You must also
show that you have 'sufficient interest' in the proceedings, that is, that you
were affected in some way by the decision you are challenging. Non-
governmental organisations which have been promoting environmental protection
for 12 months in respect of relevant matters are not required to demonstrate a
sufficient interest.

The High Court will examine the decision and how it was reached and will
decide whether or not it was legal or unconstitutional. The High Court may
then quash or cancel the decision – by issuing an order known as 'certiorari'.
The High Court can also order a decision maker, who is obliged to make a
decision but has failed or refused to do so, to actually make the decision –
this is known as an order of 'mandamus'. An order of prohibition may also be
granted in appropriate circumstances – for example an order prohibiting a
decision maker from making a decision. Other orders that are available include
declarations, injunctions of an interim, interlocutory or permanent nature, or
an award of damages.
